 
  
 
 REVIEW ART ICLE /  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT in Current Drug Targets                                                                                 
 
Smart Drug-Delive ry Systems for Cancer Nanotherapy 
 
 
 
Paola Sánchez-Morenoa,b, Juan Luis Ortega-Vinuesa b, José Manuel Peula-Garcíab,c, Juan Antonio 
Marchal d,e and Houria Boulaiz d,e,* 
 
 
aCell Biology Unit. IRCCS San Martino  University Hospital—IST National  Cancer  Research  Institute Largo  Rosanna 
Benzi, 10, 16132 Genova, Italy;   
bBiocolloid and  Fluid  Physics Group,  Department  of Applied Physics, University of Granada, 18071 Granada, Spain; 
cDepartment of Applied Physics II, University of Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain;  
dBiopathology and Regenerative Medicine Institute (IBIMER), Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Granada, 
Granada E-18100, Spain;  
eDepartment  of Human Anatomy and Embryology, Biosanitary  Institute of Granada (ibs.GRANADA), University 
Hospitals of Granada-University of Granada, Granada E-18012, Spain  
 
  
ABSTRACT 
 
Background : Despite all the advances achieved in the field of tumor-biology research, in most cases conventional 
therapies including chemotherapy are still the leading choices. The main disadvantage of these treatments, in addition to 
the low solubility of many antitumor drugs, is their lack of specificity, which leads to the occurrence of severe side effects 
due to nonspecific drug uptake by healthy cells. 
Objective : The purpose of this manuscript is to review and analyze the recent progress made in cancer nanotherapy.  
Results : Progress in nanotechnology and its application in medicine have provided new opportunities and different smart 
systems. Such systems can improve the intracellular delivery of the drugs due to their multifunctionality and targeting potential. First, we provide a global overview of cancer and different smart nanoparticles currently used in oncology. 
Then, we analyze in detail the development of drug-delivery strategies in cancer therapy, focusing mainly on the 
intravenously administered smart nanoparticles. Finally, we discuss the challenges, clinical trials, marketed nanomedicines and future directions of the nanotherapy applied to cancer treatment. 
Conclusion : In this review, we have evidenced the tremendous potential that smart drug-delivery systems have to enhance 
the  therapeutic effect of current standard treatment modalities, including chemotherapies and radiotherapies. 
 
 
Keywords: Nanomedicine, smart nanoparticle, drug delivery, cancer therapy. 
 
  
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
Nanotechnology is an emerging science involved in the design, characterization, and manipulation of devices, 
struc tures, and systems by controlling size and shape at atomic, molecular, and supramolecular level [1]. Progress in 
nanotechnology has resulted in the development of novel nanomaterials with physico-chemical characteristics (higher 
surface-to-volume  ratio) that make them an excellent candi date  to be applied  in  the biomedical  science.  The 
applica tions in the screening,  diagnosis, and treatment of diseases, are referred  to as “nanomedicine”,  a new 
discipline  of science  and  engineering  that  has  the  ability  to  dramatically change   individual   and  population-
based   health   care  [2]. While the basic approach of conventional therapies is to eliminate diseased cells faster than 
healthy cells, nanomedi cine attempts to use sophisticated approaches and integrates innovations  in genomics  and  
proteomics  heading  toward  a more  personalized  medicine  in order  to improve  treatment for many diseases [3, 4]. 
 
The use of nanoparticles allows enhancing our under- standing of diseases pathogenesis and providing treatment 
at a molecular level. Currently, nanomedicine is playing an important role in the development of the pharmaceutical 
in- dustry, either in the form of drugs nanoparticle-based  deliv ery systems or imaging agents, connecting a broad 
range of disciplines —engineering, biology, physics, and chemistry— and leading to numerous publications  and 
patents [see (Fig. 1)]. However, a discrepancy  does exist between the number of nanomaterials in clinical use and 
the number of published papers  in  cancer  nanomedicine  [5]. Indeed,  in the field  of cancer  therapy,  many  of  
the  nanomedicines  being  investi gated today have improved solubility and have tailored the release  rates to 
enhance  the pharmacokinetics  of the drugs (such as platinates, camptothecins, and adriamycins) and to reduce their 
adverse side effects.  
In fact, only 5% of the classical low-molecular-weight drugs, that reach the clinical trial stage ever make it to the 
market  [6].  This  is  likely  because,  reformulating  the  currently  approved  drugs  in  nanoparticles,  provides  a  
small boost in performance that is not worth the effort, time, and development costs that have to be invested in the 
pharmaceu tical industry. Moreover, the added complexity of nanoparti cles also discourages their use to deliver 
drugs. Thus, drugs that could improve their effectiveness when administrated by nanocarriers are not formulated in 
this way [5]. 
 
2. NANOTHERAPY FOR  CANCER: SMAR T NANOPARTICLES AS DRUG-DELIVERY SYSTEMS 
 
Cancer   is  a  major  public-health   problem   worldwide. More than 30% of all people will develop some form 
of cancer during their lifetime. For instance, it is the second lead- ing cause of death in the United States, and is 
expected to surpass  heart diseases  as the leading  cause of death  in the next few years [7]. 
 
According to the estimation of the most common cancers expected  to occur in the United States  in 2015, most 
com- mon cancers among men will be prostate (about one-quarter of new diagnoses cancers), lung and bronchus, 
and colorectal cancers.  The most commonly  diagnosed  cancers  in women will be breast (expected to account for 
29% of all new cancers), lung and bronchus, and colorectal [8]. (Fig. 2) shows the  estimated  data  of  predicted  
deaths  by  cancer  in  the United States for five leading cancer types by gender.  
Cancer is a complex multistep process where cells attain certain hallmark properties because of both genetic and 
epi- genetic alterations [9]. Diagnosis  is  undoubtedly  the  first  and  most  important step  in cancer  therapy.  The 
first therapeutic  option  for patients with solid tumors is usually surgery, to remove cancer cells.  Afterwards,  and  
to destroy  any  possible  remnants  of the tumor, the area should be irradiated. Simultaneously or in a later phase, 
chemotherapy  can be used to kill residual can- cer cells and possible metastases [10]. Conventional antican cer 
therapies are distributed non-specifically  in the body and damage both cancer and healthy cells in a state of 
division. This involves the use of suboptimal treatment to prevent excessive toxicities [11]. Furthermore,  many 
effective drugs are hydrophobic or, if soluble, never reach their destination. Moreover, the multiple and interconnected 
pathways of carcinogenesis complicate efforts for providing effective thera pies. Therefore, a paradigm change is 
underway as research ers are working to design therapies for specific cancer phenotypes [12].  
 
While the search for new strategies for cancer therapy continues, it becomes increasingly evident that targeted 
nanovehicles,  designed  to achieve  the specific  organ  is the key to formulate effective treatment. The greatest 
advantage of the application of nanomedicines in cancer lies in its potential to create novel structures with enhanced 
abilities to translocate through cell membranes, thereby, enhancing their delivery efficiency. The benefits of 
developing nanoparticles as drug-delivery systems include enhancement of pharma cological  activity,  delivery  of  
more  than  one  therapeutic agent  for  combination  therapy,  solubility  —as  many  drug molecules can be 
incorporated in the particle matrix— stabil- ity and bioavailability (designing nanoparticles with optimal size and 
surface properties to increase their circulation  time in the bloodstream) [13]. These nanoparticles could also im- 
prove the protection from toxicity and physical and chemical degradation, sustained delivery [14], feasibility of 
variable routes of administration  [15], facilitation  of the drug trans- port across critical and specific barriers 
[16], etc. Engineer- ing materials on this scale allow for novel medical therapies, which  are  able  to release  the 
associated  drug  to the target tissue in a controlled manner, improving the specificity and resulting in decreased side 
effects for patients [13]. Another objective is to overcome the development of multiple drug- resistance mechanisms 
that make this treatment ineffective in a high percentage  of cancer cases because cancer cells can evade  the  
cytotoxicity  [17,  18].  P-glycoprotein  is  the  best known and most extensively investigated mechanism of drug 
resistance [19]. Upon entering in the cell, nanoparticles are involved in an endosome allowing them to accumulate in 
 
the cells without being recognized by the P-glycoprotein efflux pump,  resulting  in the increased  intracellular  
concentration of drugs [20]. Moreover, receptor-targeting  ligands strategies that are usually internalized via 
receptor-mediated  endocyto- sis, may have particular potential for overcoming drug resis tance.  Thus,  a  folate  
receptor–targeted,  transferrin- conjugated paclitaxel-loaded nanoparticles [21] and doxorub icin loaded pH-sensitive 
polymeric micelles [22] showed greater inhibitory activity against drug-resistant MCF-7 cells and/or xenografts than 
did their non targeted drug-free counterparts.  
Anticancer   nanomedicines   require   the   integration   of drugs  into  smart  nanoparticles.  Diverse  platforms  
can  be used to combine different drugs into a single nanotherapeutic agent  for  synergistic  therapeutic  benefits.  
These  platforms are  submicron-sized  particles  (10  –  1000  nm  in  diameter) [23], devices or systems that can be 
made using a variety of materials (including polymers, lipids, viruses, and organometallic compounds, among others) 
[20]. Moreover, all nanoparticles based on drug-delivery vectors must be able to both  transport  and  release  the  
drug  to  a  specific  location. They can be classified by their physical form or functional properties,  both of which 
should be adapted  to the specific needs of the drug to be delivered, and the intended therapeu tic use [24].  
Although  nanomedicine  is a relatively  new field of science,  many  new  smart  nanoparticles  have  been  
developed over  the  past  three  decades  for  drug  delivery.  These  plat- forms are generally classified into the 
following categories: polymer-based drug carriers, lipid-based drug carriers, viral nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes, 
ceramic nanoparticles, and metal-based nanoparticles. (Fig. 3) shows some examples of drug-delivery platforms.  
 
2.1. Polymer-based Drug  Carriers 
 
A plethora of different polymeric molecules have been investigated to generate therapeutic carriers. They include 
polymer-protein conjugates, drug-polymer conjugates and supramolecular drug-delivery systems. Among the many 
polymers that have been proposed, only a few have been accepted into clinical practice. Specifically, biodegradable 
polymers are highly preferred due to outstanding bioavail ability, better encapsulation, control release, and less toxic 
properties.  
 
The  use  of  polymeric  substances  offers  various  advan tages. One of the most important is the incorporation  
of hydrophobic drugs to some polymer chains that enhance water- solubility, changing the biodistribution  pattern 
[25]. Another advantage  could  be  found  using  mucoadhesive  materials, such as chitosan,  since it increases  
intimacy  of contact  be- tween the drug-containing polymer and cell membranes [26]. In the field of cancer therapy, 
site-specific drug delivery nanocarriers are sought, locating in the external part of the nanoparticles different  
molecules  that favor  cell- internalization by a reception mediation [27]. More recently, great attention is being 
paid to the development of novel multifunctional nanoparticles, composed of different mole- cules that are able to 
co-deliver multiple components, target the delivery of drugs to the specific tumor cells, and release the 
therapeutic agent  [28].  Several types  of polymer-based drug carriers have been tested as potential drug-delivery 
systems  for  cancer  treatments,  including  polymeric  nanoparti cles, dendrimers, hydrogels and micelles. Below a 
summary of these types is presented.  
 
2.1.1. Polymeric Nanopar ticles  
 
Polymeric nanoparticles are engineered from biodegrad able and biocompatible polymers and they have been 
synthe sized using various methods based on the application  needs and the type of drugs to be encapsulated [29]. 
These particles are  solid-matrix  systems,  in  which  the  drug  is  dispersed within the particle or conjugated to the 
polymeric backbone. Polymeric nanoparticles have been developed to encapsulate either macromolecules  such as 
nucleic acids and proteins as well as hydrophobic or hydrophilic small drug molecules. In an effort to avoid their 
recognition and removal by the mononuclear phagocyte system and thereby achieve long circulation time, nanoparticles 
are usually coated by other protective polymers, such as poly(ethylene glycol), poly(ethylene oxide), or poly(acrylic 
acid), or dextran. How- ever,  this  layer  of protection  should  not be very dense be- cause the cellular uptake would 
also be hindered [30].  
Different  structures  of polymeric  nanoparticles  are used in cancer treatment, as very recently reviewed by Wang 
et al. [31]:  linear  polymers,  star  polymers,  cylindrical  polymer brushes,  macrocyclic  polymers,  macrocyclic  
brushes,  and hyperbranched polymers.  
Natural  polymers  (i.e.  chitosan,  heparin,  albumin,  etc.) have  been  used  in  FDA-approved  drug-delivery  
formula tions. As an example, low-molecular chitosan nanoparticles decorated with a hydrophilic shell of methoxy 
polyethylene glycol and a core of cholesterol (to improve drug solubility) showed good efficacy of encapsulation 
and delivery of pacli taxel [32]. In addition, nanoparticles  formed  by silk fibroin (a natural protein polymer) have 
stirred great excitement  in the field of drug delivery, due to their ability to deliver anti- cancer drugs [33]. 
Nevertheless, the heterogeneity  of natural polymers,  cost,  and  manipulation  difficulty,  make  it much more  usual  
to  develop  synthetic  polymers  with  enhanced drug-delivery potential.  
 
Numerous nanoparticles are in pre-clinical or clinical development [34]. For instance, nanoparticles comprising 
hydrophobic   copolymers   —such   as  poly  (lactic-co-glycolic acid)  (PLGA)  and  poly(alkyl cyanoacrylate)   
(PACA)—  have been used to co-encapsulate chemotherapeutic agents and inhibitors  of  the  Multidrug  Resistance  
(MDR)  mechanism for delivery to various types of cancer [35]. Another example can be found in nanoparticles 
made of a core of polyca prolactone  and  a hydrophilic  shell  of  polyethylene  glycol, that have shown their potential 
  
usefulness in anti-tumor treatment encapsulating and delivering cisplatin [36].  
 
2.1.2. Hydrogels  
 
Hydrogels  are hydrophilic  polymer  networks  with vari- able structures. They can be classified into those that 
have a linear structure, and those exhibiting polymeric network with three-dimensional covalent crosslinking. 
Covalent bonds between chains affect the overall properties of the hydrogel (i.e. swelling  ability,  elasticity,  and 
drug loading  capacity). They  are  able  to  absorb  from  10-20%  (an  arbitrary  lower limit) up to thousands of times 
their dry weight in water, a property attributed  to the presence of hydrophilic  groups in their structure [37]. This 
makes them very useful as potential drug carriers in the form of micro- or nano-particles. In addition, some 
hydrogels possess features of fluid transport and stimulus responsive characteristics (e.g. pH, temperature, salinity, or 
light) [38].  
 
A number of synthetic hydrogels have been studied for anticancer purposes. Some have been used to model micro- 
environments of tumor vascularization [39], and many others for drug delivery [40]. For example, Cheng et al. 
prepared thermosensitive  hydrogels  based  on  poly  (y-ethyl-l- glutamate)-poly(ethylene glycol)-poly( y-ethyl-l-
glutamate) triblock copolymers (PELG-PEG-PELG) for localized and sustained delivery of paclitaxel (PTX) in vivo. 
The results demonstrated that the PTX-incorporated hydrogels could efficiently  suppress  the tumor proliferation,  and 
did not result in obvious side effect [41]. Recently, Seo et al. have successfully prepared injectable intratumoral 
hydrogels composed  of  a diblock  copolymer  based  on  poly(ethylene glycol and polycaprolactone (MPEG-b-(PCL-
ran-PLLA)) containing 5-fluorouracil. A single injection of this system (applied locally in the tumor) resulted in a 
significant tumor growth inhibition [42].  
 
2.1.3. Dendrimers 
 
Dendrimers are synthetic polymers with highly branched structures consisting  of an initiator core and multiple 
layers with active terminal groups. Each layer is called a generation (the core is denoted as generation zero) and they 
are formed of repeating units [43]. Due to their specific molecular struc ture and the possibility of incorporating a 
large number of functional  groups at spatially  defined  positions,  dendrimers are ideal candidates to develop smart 
nanocarriers for bio- medical applications.  They have been used as antimicrobial and antiviral drugs, in tissue 
engineering, drug delivery, gene transfection, and other capacities [44-49]. Another advantage lies  in  the  fact  that  
bioactive  agents  may  be  encapsulated either  into the interior  of the dendrimers  or can be chemi- cally  attached  
or  physically  adsorbed  onto  the  dendrimer surface [50].  
 
In this context, Ren et al. developed a poly (amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimer that simultaneously delivers 
genetic material  and  a  chemotherapeutic  agent.  That  is,  5- fluorouracil (5-FU) was encapsulated in the cavities of 
the dendrimer core via hydrogen bonds, while an antisense microRNA (miR-21) was complexed to the surface [51]. 
The synchronic delivery of the two therapeutic agents resulted in synergistic anticancer efficacy, apoptotic activity, 
and de- creased  migration  ability  of  the  cancer  cells  compared  to each agent alone. Zhang and Shi coated G5-
PAMAM- dendrimers with folic acid and doxorubicin, finding a multi- functional system that might serve as a 
valuable nanodevice for targeting cancer chemotherapy  [52]. Finally, Kaminskas et al.  explored  the  utility  of  a 
PEGylated  polylysine  dendrimer conjugated  to doxorubicin  to promote  the controlled and prolonged exposure of 
lung-resident cancers to cytotoxic drug. They demonstrated >95% reduction in lung-tumor bur- den in rats after two 
weeks of treatment [53]. This success suggests that PEGylated dendrimers have the potential as inhalable drug-delivery 
nanosystems against lung cancers.  
 
2.1.4. Micelles  
 
Polymeric  micelles  are formulated  through  a self- assembly process using block copolymers  consisting of two 
or more polymer chains with different hydrophilic character. These copolymers spontaneously assemble into a core-
shell structure  in  an  aqueous  environment.  Hydrophobic  blocks form  the core  where  any  hydrophobic  drug  can  
be carried while the hydrophilic blocks form the shell. Polymeric micelles  are usually  more stable  in blood  than 
are liposomes and other surfactant micelles because the amphiphilic co- polymers usually employed have a 
considerably  lower critical micelle concentration  value. Due to such unique proper- ties, polymeric micelles have 
been well demonstrated to be effective drug carriers for cancer therapy and image-based analysis of tumors [54-56]. In 
addition, it is currently possi ble to confer pH-sensitive properties to some polymeric micelles, improving the drug-
release process in anticancer treatments [57, 58]. 
 
Wang et al. showed the specific binding of paclitaxel- loaded micelles targeted with a MCF-7 cell-specific phage 
protein [59]. Ke et al. designed micelles loaded with both thioridazine —which has been reported to kill cancer stem 
cells— and doxorrobicin, providing a promising strategy for breast-cancer treatment by targeting both cancer and 
cancer stem cells with this combination therapy [60]. Yang et al. synthesized mPEG-b-PDLLA micelles loaded with 
docetaxel and demonstrated  clear metastasis  inhibition  of 4Ta murine cells in the lung of mice. Micelles were 
capable of internaliz ing in the 4T1 cells via endocytosis, significantly decreasing tumor metastasis [61]. Finally, Hu 
and collaborators have recently shown a complete regression of breast tumor using a crossed-linked thermosensitive 
polymeric micelle linked to docetaxel by a covalent conjugation via hydrolysable ester bonds  [62].  Docetaxel-
micelle  complexes  showed  great  in vivo efficacy in reducing and establishing MDA-MB-231 tumors in mice, 
even after a single intravenous injection. The preclinical data shown by these authors would support clinical 
translation of this novel smart nanosystem for cancer treatment.  
 
 
2.2. Virus-based Nano particles  
 
Viruses can be considered living nanoparticles with a core–shell structure. The infectious agents are in the core 
surrounded  by a shell comprised of proteins or proteins embedded in lipid membranes. They range in sizes from 
10 nm to over a micron and can be found in a variety of distinctive shapes (most abundantly icosahedrons, spheres, 
and tubes). They can be either isolated directly after inducing the expression  of the coat-proteins  in eukaryotic  
cells,  or assem bled in vitro from coat-protein subunits purified from any recombinant  host,  from  mammalian  cells  
to  bacteria  [63]. The main advantage of virus-like particles is their morpho- logical uniformity, biocompatibility, 
and easy functionaliza tion. They have been extensively used for delivery of differ ent substances, vaccines, and 
gene therapy due to their high gene-transfection  efficiency and fusogenic cell receptor- binding  properties.  
However,  their implementation  into clinical  therapy  has  been  plagued  with  significant  draw- backs.  
 
For different substances to be encapsulated in virus-like nanoparticles,  it is usual to resort to simple 
supramolecular self-assembly and disassembly processes. The specialized literature  indicates that the functional 
cargoes usually pack aged with these kinds of assembly processes are genetic material or other supramolecular  
structures (such as liposomes or micelles) that are mixed with DNA. This is why the ex- tension of these virus-like 
nanoparticles for the “encapsula tion” of anti-tumor  drugs can be envisaged,  but it is rarely used today. 
Nevertheless,  the viral capsid, once it is formed, can be used to deliver drugs if the capsid is loaded with the 
chemotherapeutic  molecule  through covalent attachment.  In this case, the presence of reactive groups in the 
protein cage is mandatory. With this procedure based on chemical attachment, virus-like nanoparticles have been 
loaded with doxorubicin by Aljabali et al. [64], and Zhao et al. [65].  
 
Actually, the use of viruses for anti-cancer  treatments  is not focused  on their potential drug-delivery  ability.  
Rather, its use is based mainly on a dual ability that viruses possess: the stimulation of the immune system of the 
patient, and the direct cell lysis they provoke upon infesting a tumoral tissue. Oncolytic  viruses  are engineered  to 
self-amplify  and repli cate selectively  within cancer cells and induce toxic effects such as cell lysis and apoptosis, 
while leaving normal non- transformed  cells  intact  (or  nearly  so)  [66].  Steadily  more results show that their 
targeted infection of the tumor has the potential to create an “inflammatory storm” that arouses the innate and adaptive 
immune responses against tumors [67]. Please see the recent and detailed information on this topic in references  [68-
70].  As  shown  in  the  specialized  literature, the vaccinia  virus  family  is the  most  promising  one  to be used in 
cancer therapy.  
Additionally  virus-like nanoparticles  have a growing application  in  the  field  of  imaging  of  tumors,  although  
this topic will not be covered in this review.  
 
2.3. Carbon Nanotubes 
 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are allotropes of carbon with a cylindrical nanostructure. Nanotubes have been 
constructed with  length-to-diameter  ratios  of  up  to  28,000,000:1  [71]. CNT can be imaginatively  produced  by 
rolling up a single layer of graphene sheet (single-walled CNT; SWNT) or by rolling up many layers to form 
concentric cylinders (multi- walled CNT; MWNT) [72].  
 
Although CNTs have several unique properties related to their stiffness-flexibility and electric conductivity, non- 
functionalized  (pristine) CNTs are poorly soluble and highly cytotoxic. A great variety of safety concerns of CNT 
can be found in references [73, 74]. In summary, the toxicological profile in the human body may exert an effect at 
the cellular level, tissue level, or whole-body level, and it has been demonstrated  that the toxicity  depends  on: i) 
the length  of the CNT used (the longer,  the greater  the bio-incompatibility), ii) the surface hydrophicity (since a 
surface chemical functionalization of the CNTs with small hydrophilic groups en- hances their biocompatibility), 
and iii) the CNT individuali zation  (i.e.  a  lack  of  any  aggregation  process),  since  the higher the degree of 
individualization,  the higher the degree of urinary excretion.  
As mentioned above, if the CNT surface is functionalized with  soluble  and  biocompatible  materials,  its  
solubility  in water increases as does s its biocompatibility.  Functionalized carbon  nanotubes  have  been  
successfully  investigated  for several  biomedical  applications   such  as  proteins,  nucleic acids, and drug carriers 
[75-77]. The potential of CNTs for delivery of anticancer agents might be attributed to their exclusive 
physicochemical properties, especially their ability to cross various biological barriers by a piercing (needle-like) 
mechanism. Application of CNTs for the targeted delivery of drugs has become one of the main areas of interest for 
differ ent research groups. In this context, in vitro delivery of pacli taxel attached to single-walled CNTs showed 
higher efficacy in inhibiting  tumor growth than delivery of paclitaxel alone [78]. Furthermore, Liu et al. 
demonstrated that the control release of the chemotherapeutic drug 7-Ethyl-10-hydroxy- camptothecin (SN38) by 
SWCNTs conjugated with antibody C225, can achieve targeted therapy against EGFR over- expressed  colorectal  
cancer  cells,  suggesting  that  SWCNT could be a good chance to form carriers for targeting therapy [79].  
 
2.4. Lipid-based Drug Carriers 
 
2.4.1. Liposomes  
 
Liposomes are spherical lipid vesicles in which the aque ous  phase  is  encapsulated  by  a  bilayer  (or  more)  
of  amphiphilic lipid molecules of synthetic or natural origin [80]. Liposomes has become one of the first 
  
nanoparticulate plat- forms for drug delivery because of their unique characteris tics: (a) biocompatibility  and 
biologically inert profiles with- out antigenic  or toxic reactions  in most patients; (b) a long life  in  blood  
enhanced  with  the  pegylation  of  the  surface (stealth liposomes); and (c) the easy control of physico- chemical 
properties as size or surface characteristics which provide  multi-functionalized  liposome  systems  [81]  coated with 
polymers  and different  ligands  to target specific  cells [82]. Immunoliposomes, with monoclonal antibodies or 
anti- body fragments attached  to the surface of liposomes,  repre sent the better part of active targeting studies [83]. 
The different  structural  parts  of the liposome,  that is,  the internal water, the phospholipid  bilayer or the bilayer 
interface,  can be used to carry both, hydrophilic and hydrophobic therapeu tic agents. For each particulate case the 
amount of drug loading is different and must be carefully  optimized  to develop the different formulations [83].  
Taking into account the “first-generation” of drug nano carriers, liposomal drug delivery systems are the most 
used in clinical applications and with the better result. In this con- text, Doxil®, a pegylated liposomal formulation 
with doxorubicin was the first nanocarrier of liposomal character istics approved in 1995 by the USFDA (Food and 
Drug Administration  of  USA)  indicated  for  the  Kaposi´s  sarcoma related with AIDS [84]. Moreover, in 2012, 
Marqibo®, a liposome  composed  of  egg  sphingomyelin  and  cholesterol was  used  to battle  acute  lymphoblastic  
leukemia  [85].  Be- sides these two compounds,  only around 10 liposomal  formulations have been approved for 
clinical use, half of these to deliver anticancer  drugs on the basis of reduced  side effects [83, 86]. However, most 
of them are in clinical and preclinical trials [81], preferentially  focused for the therapy of different types of cancer 
and several encapsulating nucleic acids as plasmids or siRNA.  
The latest trends have focused on the development of multifunctional  liposomes,  improving  the limited  
properties of the conventional ones— that is, low stability and targeting properties and limited control of the 
release profile [81, 87]. A PEGylated  version  of neutral-lipid-based  nanoliposomes has shown promise as highly 
effective and safe delivery systems for systemic use of siRNA therapeutics [88]. Taking advantage  of the subacid  
environment  typical of tumor tis- sues,  several  pH-responsive  nanosystem  have  been  devel oped for an efficient 
delivery anticancer drugs inside tumor cells.  Phosphatidylethanolamine-based  pH-sensitive liposomes surface 
modified with a cell penetrating peptide (RGD peptide) have been used to enhance the effectiveness of  docetaxel  
treatment,  showing  good  pH  sensitivity  with higher cytotoxicity and cellular uptake ratios [89]. The same pH-
sensitive property system has been achieved by implant ing octylamine-graft-poly aspartic acid onto liposomes. The 
structure of grafted systems bolsters the stability of the drug carrier and raises tumor-cell toxicity due to the fast 
release of antitumor  drug  cytarabine,  subject  to the octylamine  in an acidic  environment  [90].  Temperature-
sensitive   liposomes have also been proposed. A recent example consists of liposomes with a triple functionalization: 
PEGylation, ther- mosensitive chains and target specificity by the surface conjugation of antibody Herceptin. This 
system retains a hydro- phobic cytotoxic drug, Docetaxel, inside but immediately released at temperatures above 
40ºC [91].  
 
2.4.2. Solid-lipid Nanopar ticles  
 
Solid-lipid nanoparticles have been developed by Müller et al. and Gasco et al. at the beginning of the 90s 
[92]. The solid-lipid nanoparticles (SLN), which range in size between 40 and 1000 nm, are composed of a 
biocompati ble/biodegradable  matrix of solid lipids stabilized by surfac tants [93]. This lipid core maintain their 
solid state at room and body temperatures  SLN present  several advantages  for their use as drug nanocarriers: the 
effective and economic production  process  with a low cost of the solid  lipid com- pared to phospholipids  and the 
absence  of organic solvent; the  possibility  of  large-scale  production;  good  tolerability and biodegradability; 
physical stability; amenability to encapsulating   hydrophilic   and  hydrophobic   bioactive  mole- cules or drugs; and 
the potential application in alternatives routes of administration  instead of parenteral  ones [92, 94-96].  However,  
SLN  has  certain  disadvantages,  mainly  the low drug loading, especially with peptides/proteins and other 
hydrophilic molecules; and the drug expulsion from the nanoparticle during storage time as a consequence of trans- 
formations  of the solid lipidic components  [87, 96]. A second  generation  of  SLN  has  been  developed  to  
minimize these drawbacks,. Nano-structured Lipid Carriers (NLC) are based on a mixture of solid and liquid lipids, 
which reduces the homogeneity of the matrix structure and increases the solubility for drugs [87].  
 
Various anticancer drugs, including etoposide [97], methotrexate [98], idarubicin [99], paclitaxel and docetaxel 
[100], or edelfosine [101] have been incorporated  into SLN and evaluated with positive and promising results. 
overcom ing  many  troubles  observed  in  the  conventional  therapies. Due to the low tumor uptake shown by SLN 
and NLC using the intravenous administration route, the interest in both as alternative   to  other   nanocarriers,   lies   
in   its   application through  other  routes  of administration,  such as pulmonary, oral,  ocular,  and  especially  dermal  
ones,  making  them  the subject of interest for numerous studies [102].  
 
Several  taxanes  have  been  directly  delivered  into  the lungs by inhalation using multifunctional  NCL. 
These nano- carriers have been coupled to siRNA, preventing drug resis tance, and targeted with a synthetic 
hormone specific to the recognition of overexpressed receptors of lung-cancer cells [103]. The molecular mechanism 
of SLN and nucleic acid assembling process is under study in order to gain in-depth knowledge of this complexation 
process and how the nucleic acid carried may be released intracellularly [104]. SLN have also shown a protective 
effect of reducing the gastrointesti nal  toxicity  of  an  antineoplastic  drug,  such  as  edelfosine. This situation has 
been tested in in vivo experiments by oral administration in mice [105]. As in other nanocarriers, hydrophilic 
polymers or surfactant coatings improve the stabil ity properties of the SLN and NCL. Chitosan-coated SLN 
represent a promising system for the oral drug delivery of hydrophobic drugs [105] and pegylated NLC 
 
encapsulating Amoitone-B  was  found  to  improve  the  cytotoxic  effect  of this  drug  in human-colon  and  liver-
cancer  cells  in a dose- and time-dependent  manner due to the solubility  of PEG in the cell membranes [106].  
 
2.4.3. Lipid Nanoemulsions 
 
The nanoemulsions based in lipids are oil/water colloidal dispersions in which the nanoparticles (dispersed 
phase) are stabilized in water (dispersed phase) by surfactants and co- surfactants self-organized at the oil/water 
interface [107]. Emulsions are usually classified into two main categories: microemulsions  and nanoemulsions.  
These  latter  are emul sions with a mean droplet diameter  on the nanometer  scale and generally composed of a 
dispersed oil phase within a continuous aqueous phase having a radius of less than 1000 nm,  although  some  
authors  consider  500  nm  as  the  upper limit [107, 108], while other authors place the cutoff at 200 nm [109] or 
even 100 nm [110]. However, it is generally accepted  that  droplet  diameters  in  nanoemulsions  are  less than  
~200-300  nm  in  size,  and  thermodynamically  it is  a non-equilibrium  state which needs to be stabilized by 
altera- tion of the attraction–repulsion  potential, for example, by the inclusion of stabilizing surfactants [111]. 
Nevertheless, the kinetics of destabilization  is so slow that they can be consid ered stable from this point of view, 
in a different way to mi- croemulsions, which can reach up to 1 μm in size as they are thermodynamically   stable   
[112-114].   Nanoemulsions   are also usually referred to as lipid nanocapsules, because morphologically  they  are 
formed  by an oily  core  encapsulated inside a spherical polymeric shell (thick steric barrier at the droplet interface) 
[113]. However, some authors reserve nanocapsule  nomenclature  for structures  formed  by a more rigid polymeric  
shell prepared by interfacial polymerization or interfacial  nano-deposition  [115, 116]. In any case, both lipid 
nanocapsules and lipid nanoemulsions show simultane- ously characteristics of lipid core micelles and polymer 
nanocapsules with a shell composed by a blend of phosphol ipids and surfactants [117].  
 
Emulsion-solvent  evaporation is a widely used technique to encapsulate lipophilic drugs inside lipid 
nanocapsules or nanoemulsions,   constituting   a  simple  oil-in-water   (O/W) emulsion. A handicap of these 
nanosystems is the reduced loading level of biomolecules and drugs of hydrophilic character due to their leakage to 
the aqueous phase before the solidification  process  of  the  polymeric  surface  shell  take place. A modified water-
in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) double emulsion allows to reduce the loos of active molecules pre- serving at the same time 
as the biological activity of the biomolecules in the aqueous phase [118, 119]. Vegetable oils (fatty acyls) or middle-
chain triacylglycerols are the typical compounds of the dispersed O-phase in most nanoemulsions, while the shell 
can be formed by natural phospholipids, alcohols and a wide variety of polymers/surfactants.  The use of polymers 
with hydrophilic segment such as PEG, poly- ethylene oxide, poloxamers, poloxamines, polysorbates or chitosan is 
widespread [120, 121]. Polymers with these characteristics drive to an increase of the colloidal stability of the 
nanosystem by means of steric repulsion [122], may help to achieve Stealth®  nanosystems that extend the life-
time in the bloodstream after intravenous injection by repelling plasma proteins [123].  
 
The use of nanoemulsions  as delivery systems is attract ing interest in the pharmaceutical industry. Recently, 
more innovative nanoemulsion formulations have been developed, varying  the  different  components   such  as  the  
emulsifier and/or the emulsified oil nature [124]. The new functionali ties join to the high biocompatibility and 
biodegradability typical of these emulsions has allowed the access of nanoe mulsions to the drug delivery systems 
market and Etomidat- Lipuro®   (encapsulating   etomidate)  and  Diazepam-Lipuro®(encapsulating diazepam) are 
examples of this commerciali zation [125]. The main advantages  of nanoemulsions  in the field  of drug-delivery  
systems  for  hydrophobic  drugs  over other nanotechnologies are: inexpensive and easy-to-scale production,   low  
toxicity,  independence   of  dilution,   high loading capacity, formulation  stability, and reduced side effects  [126,  
127].  Microemulsions  have  their  main  applica tions in oral or topical delivery [128]. The better stability and small 
size of nanoemulsions makes them more suitable for parenteral  drug  delivery  and  usually,  nanoparticles  smaller 
than  100  nm  preferentially   accumulate   in  cancer  tissues through  the  so-called  enhanced  permeability  and  
retention effect [87, 129].  
 
Nanoemulsions have shown a strong potential for drug delivery in cancer treatment and have been widely 
investi gated.  For  example,  pharmacokinetics  studies  have  shown that celecoxib nanoemulsions transdermally 
applied on rats increased bioavailability  as compared to an oral capsule formulation   [130].  Orally  administered   
nanoemulsions   have also been developed improving the oral bioavailability of hydrophobic drugs such as paclitaxel 
[131], tamoxifen citrate [132],  and  raloxifene  hydrochloride  [133],  among  others. The enhanced solubility of 
hydrophobic drugs in the inner oil phase of the emulsion system allows the amount of the drug supplied to be 
reduced while protecting body fluids and tis- sues from their direct action, thereby minimizing the harmful side 
effects associated with the intravenously  intake of these chemotherapeutic agents [134]. However, although these 
nanosystems  improve  pharmacokinetics  and  bioavailability of lipophilic drugs, they require a higher sophistication 
by developing multifunctional nanoemulsions with tuneable biological properties [111].  
Recent studies on nanoemulsions for parenteral admini stration have been developed, showing attractive results. 
For example, lipid nanoemulsions  have been used as a platform for the concurrent delivery of the tocotrienol-rich  
fraction of vitamin   E,  which   previously   showed   anticancer   activity [135]. Promising results have also been 
shown by the PEGy lated  nanoemulsions   loaded  with  lycobetaine  (LBT)-oleic acid  ionic   complex   against   lung   
cancer,   which   showed higher LBT levels in blood and longer circulation time, de- creased  LBT  concentration  in 
the heart,  liver,  and  kidney, higher  growth-inhibitory   effect,  and  longer  survival  com- pared to free LBT [136]. 
Delivery systems actively targeted to the tumor site or specific tumor cells have been developed, covering  the lipid 
nanocapsule  surface  with several ligands and biomolecules. Different studies have reported on folate- mediated 
  
targeting of antitumor drugs and genes by conju gating folic acid onto polymeric nanoemulsions. In this way, the  use  
of  folate-chitosan  conjugates  covering  lipid  core- shell  nanocapsules  has  allowed  to  improve  the  antitumor 
activity of these nanosystem [137]. Targeting ligands as monoclonal antibodies allows the development of lipid 
immuno-nanocapsules  in which a specific antibody molecule is conjugated to the nanocapsule surface. Multi-
therapeutic systems  can  be  designed  using  antibodies  interfering  with signal transduction pathways involved in 
cancer-cell prolif eration [87]. This is the case of lipid immunonanocapsules  in which a specific HER2 oncoprotein 
antiboby was covalently immobilized  on a carboxyl-functionalized  surface.  Docetaxel-loaded HER2 immuno-
nanocapsules combine the cytotoxic effect of the loaded taxane and the specific surface antibody,  increasing  their  
uptake  and  the  cytotoxicity   in HER2 overexpressing tumor-cell lines [138].  
 
2.5. Ceramic Nanoparticles  
 
Ceramic  nanoparticles  are  typically  composed  of  inorganic compounds such as hydroxyapatite, zirconia, 
titania, alumina and silica [139]. Moreover, metal oxides, and metal sulfides  can  also  be  used  to  form  the  
nanoparticle  core. [140].  They  are generally  bio-inert  and  have  porous  struc tures.  These  nanoparticles   have  
been  proposed   as  drug- delivery vehicles to carry drugs for various cancer therapies because  they  can  be easily  
engineered  to the desired  size, shape, and porosity [141, 142]. Some advantages make ceramic nanoparticles a 
promising tool for the control drug delivery: the simple conditions required for the preparative processes, high 
stability, high load capacity, easy incorpora tion into hydrophobic and hydrophilic systems and different 
administration  routes (oral, inhalation, etc.) [143]. There are no swelling or porosity variations with a change in 
pH, and they are not vulnerable  to microbial attack [144]. They can also be easily functionalized by various 
molecules due to the presence of negative charge on the surface. It is possible to design a system of an ultra-small 
size (less than 50 nm) helping them to evade the reticulo-endothelial  system (RES) of the body [145].  
 
Titania  nanoparticles  have  been  successfully  used  in in vitro studies, representing a new therapeutic agent for 
differ ent human cancer cells by means of photoexcitation  or ultra- sound processes [143]. The design and synthesis 
of hydroxyapatite (HA) nanoparticles, the most stable form of calcium phosphate, are focused mainly on bone 
regeneration. However, other applications  have been proposed, for exam ple the use of HA nanoparticles that have 
shown antiprolif erative and proapoptotic on hepatic carcinomas [146]. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles of around 
100-130 nanome ters of diameter were loaded with camptothecin  and targeted with folic acid, and a dramatic 
improvement was achieved in the potency of tumor suppression (two different human pancreatic cancer xenografts 
on mice) [147]. However, these systems present a major disadvantage—that is, ceramic nanoparticles are not 
biodegradable  and they might accumu late in the body and have dangerous effects [145, 148].  
 
2.6. Metal-based Nano particles  
 
Metal-core-based nanoparticles open the door to the development  of multifunctional  systems  linking  drug 
delivery with  both  magnetic  response  and  imaging  abilities  that involve the concept of theranostic systems, 
combining simul taneously  therapy and diagnostic [149]. Metal nanoparticles can be synthesized  in extremely small 
sizes (around 50 nm) and thus the large surface area provides the ability to carry a relatively  higher dose of drugs. 
One of the most commonly used is gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) because they are bio- compatible, easy to synthesize, 
characterize, and surface modify. The presence of surface plasmon resonance (SPR) bands is responsible for their 
large absorption and scattering cross-sections,  which are 4 to 5 orders of magnitude  larger than that of 
conventional  dyes [150]. Thus, gold nanoparti cles are new agents that are being evaluated for biological sensing, 
drug delivery, and cancer treatment [151]. Recently, it has  been  shown  that  AuNPs  inhibit  the  proliferation  of 
cancer cells by abrogating MAPK-signaling and reverse epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancer cells by 
reducing  the secretion  of a number  of proteins  involved  in EMT. Therefore, an inhibition of tumor growth and 
metasta sis in two separate orthotopic models of ovarian cancer were observed  [152].  Additionally,  potential  
applications  of AuNPs  have  recently  been  studied  and  administrated   in phase I & II clinical trials for cancer 
treatment [153].  
 
Other typical metal nanoparticles are core-shell magnetic nanoparticles. They consist of a metal or metal oxide 
core coated with inorganic or polymeric shell to improve their stability and render the particle biocompatible [154]. 
Metal nanoparticles can be used as thermal-release triggers when irradiated with infrared light or excited by an 
alternating magnetic  field.  Higher  cell  inactivation  was  found  when gamma radiation  (current radiotherapy)  
interacts  with high- Z-element nanoparticles (photoelectric effect), resulting in a high-level electron release in the 
media of the radio-resistant cells. Superparamagnetic zinc ferrite spinel (ZnFe 2O4) nanoparticles are an example of 
this situation [155]. In addition,  in magnetic  drug  targeting,  magnetic  carrier  particles with surface-bound  drugs 
are injected into the vascular systems and then captured at the tumor via a locally applied magnetic field. Several 
studies have demonstrated  the appli cation of magnetic nanoparticles  for drug delivery.  Chen et al. developed a 
magnetic drug-delivery system that may find potential applications in cancer treatment, in which doxoru bicin 
chemically bonded to Fe 3O4 nanoparticles, were embedded in a polyethylene glycol functionalized  porous silica shell 
[156]. Another group used external magnets to demons trate that gold-coated  iron-oxide nanoparticles  with the 
active component of cisplatin can be accumulated in specific regions,  and  that  cell-growth   inhibition  was  
localized  in those areas [157]. Fe 3O4 nanoparticles with magnetic proper ties were modified with chitosan 
crosslinked carboxymethyl- �-cyclodextrin  enhanced the drug-loading capacity. The hydrophobic  anticancer  drug  5-
fluorouracil  was  satisfactorily encapsulated and its release behavior was pH dependent and diffusion and swelling 
 
controlled [158].  
 
Currently, many other metal-based nanoparticles, as well as  various  hybrid  surface-functionalized   
nanoparticles,  are being  extensively  used for drug-delivery  applications,  such as platinum [159], silver, and 
palladium nanoparticles  [160, 161]. Quantum dots, fluorescent semiconductor nanocrystals, have also been 
extensively investigated for drug delivery and imaging [162]. They combine small size, versatile surface chemistry 
and outstanding optical properties [163]. The anti- cancer drug epirubicin was conjugated with iron oxide 
nanoparticles for delivery and image function in a tumor- bearing rat-brain model. In this case, drug delivery was 
con- ducted by magnetic targeting with promising results [164]. Docetaxel delivery and cell imaging have been 
combined in lanthanide oxide nanoparticles. This terasnostic system has a cytotoxic effect against human cervical 
carcinoma cells, and the function of optical imaging thanks to the intrinsic lumi nescence of nanoparticles [165]. 
PLGA nanoparticles encap- sulating simultaneously an anticancer drug, busulfan, with inorganic agents such as 
iron oxide nanoparticles  or manga nese-doped zinc sulfide simultaneously  allow delivery of the anticancer drug 
and knowledge of the cell uptake and biodis tribution by in vitro and in vivo imaging [166].  
 
Nanoscale  metal  organic  frameworks  (NMOFs)  are hybrid  materials   formed   by  the  self-assembly   of  
bridging ligands and metal-connecting  points. Preliminary biomedical applications of NMOFs have focused on 
their use as delivery vehicles for imaging contrast agents and molecular therapeu tics.  Several  different  
therapeutic  molecules  were  loaded within  porous  iron-carboxylate   NMOFs  at  unprecedented levels. The 
NMOFs  showed  sustained  drug release with no burst effect, and in vitro assays revealed that the nano- encapsulated 
drug showed efficacy similar to that of the free drug [167]. In addition to their use as drug-delivery systems, metal 
nanoparticles  can act directly  as pharmaceutically  active agents. This recent idea explores the therapeutic 
applica tion of inorganic nanomaterials  and the development of new anticancer  agents  based  on metal 
nanomaterials.  Several in vitro and in vivo reports suggest that certain metal-based nanoparticles can interfere with 
the antioxidant cell-defense mechanism, leading to an increase in the reactive oxygen species,  thus being  effective  
to induce  apoptosis  and  auto- phagy in cancer cells at specific concentrations that are not significantly toxic to 
non-cancerous cells [168].  
 
3. DRUG-DELIVERY STRAT EGIES 
 
One of the main objectives of nanomedicine is to over- throw the deficiencies of classical chemotherapy, 
including, firstly, the lack of specificity of the drugs, increasing the probability  of adverse side effects caused by 
the damage of both tumor and normal cells in a state of division. Secondly, the low concentration of active 
substance at the targeted site, resulting in poor therapeutic effect. Therefore, drugs need to be targeted to the tissue 
or organ of interest rather than be allowed free systemic circulation.  
 
Nanotechnology allows the possibility of designing novel and more specific therapies that act selectively on the 
target site.  This  permits  the minimization  of adverse  side  effects since smaller but more effective doses are 
administered.  
 
3.1. Passive Targeting 
 
The accumulation of a drug or drug-carrier system at a specific site is known as passive targeting and may be 
attrib uted  to physicochemical  and pharmacological  factors. This type of targeting relies on the disease pathology 
and the fe tures of tumor tissues, which may favor the accumulation  of a drug in target tissues , decreasing non-
specificity. It is generally  accepted  that the vasculature  of tumors  differs  from the surrounding tissue. Compare 
with normal well-organized vessels, the tumor angiogenesis presents characteristics that improve  drug  retention,  such  
as extensive  vascular  density and  permeability,  imperfect  vascular  architecture,  and  im- paired lymph clearance 
from the interstitial spaces of tumor tissue.  
The average pore size of the angiogenic  tumor vascula ture  is estimated  to be 100–  600  nm, in  contrast  with  
the pores  of  normal  blood  vessels  which  are  typically  <6  nm wide.  [169].  This  differentiated  structure  of  
tumor  vessels and this particular tumor vascular permeability, known as “enhanced permeation  and retention” (EPR), 
is important in the delivery of macromolecular anti-cancer agents and nanomedicines  (Fig. 4). EPR has shown 
greater activity and reduced  toxicity  of  many  anticancer  nanomedicines  com- pared with free anticancer drugs 
[170, 171]. However, there is significant heterogeneity within and between tumor types.  
 
 
3.2. Active Targeting. Potential Targeting Ligands 
 
Paul Ehrlich suggested the concept of drug targeting a century ago and coined the term “magic bullet”, referring 
to an entity consisting of two components. The first one should recognize and bind the target, hence providing 
precise trans port of the drug, while the second one should provide a therapeutic action. Ever since this concept was 
introduced, many efforts have been made in cancer therapy with the goal of designing targeted therapeutic agents 
against cancer cells [172]. Active targeting implicates the use of externally con- jugated targeting moieties for 
enhanced delivery of nanocarriers.  
 
A rapidly growing tumor requires diverse nutrients and vitamins, thus, tumor cells overexpress many tumor 
specific receptors. To achieve effective tumor-specific drug delivery, nanoparticles  are functionalized  with  
targeting  ligands  that bind to those receptors, which may help internalization upon binding [see (Fig. 5)]. 
  
Receptors exploited in targeting drugs to  tumor   tissues   and   microenvironments   are  G-protein- coupled 
receptors (GPCRs, integrins, folate receptors, trans ferrin receptors, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), 
fibroblast   growth   factors   (FGFRs)   and  sigma  receptors. Some less common receptors recently used are 
follicle- stimulating  hormone receptors,  C-type lectin receptors, bio- tin receptors, and neuropilin receptors [173].  
 
 
Other targets that are used to achieve tumor-selective accumulation of drug nanocarriers are those expressed on 
endothelial cells of tumor vasculature. The angiogenesis de- pendency of tumor growth is a promising target for the 
development of therapies that control tumor expansion by the inhibition of the growth of new tumor-feeding  blood 
vessels [174-176]. Anti-angiogenesis approaches are effective in limiting  tumor growth,  with the endothelial  cells 
of the tumor blood vessels as the main targets. Cancer cells are deprived of nutrients and oxygen with the 
consequent destruct ion of the tumor [177]. This mechanism remains debated because excessively decreasing vascular 
permeability would eventually lead to tumor progression (increased tumor hy- poxia)  and  drug  resistant  (decreased  
drug  delivery).  Thus, due to tumor heterogeneity, angiogenesis strategies are currently  proposed  to  treat  non-
vascularized  areas,  improving the delivery of the therapies [178]. The main angiogenic targets, explored by 
nanomedicine,  include the vascular  endo thelial  growth-factor  receptors  (VEGFRs),  av�3  integrins,  matrix  
metalloproteinase   receptors  (MMPs),  and  vascular cell-adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) [179].  
 
The types of ligand used to target nanosystems against cancer cells include a wide range of synthetic and natural 
compounds of different chemical classes. Some of the most widely used are monoclonal antibodies (mAb) and other 
pro- teins (such as transferrin), nucleic acids (aptamers), small molecules (hyaluronic acid, folic acid), and peptides.  
 
Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) were the first and are still the preferred class of targeting molecules.  The first 
mAb to gain FDA approval  for the treatment  of cancer was Rituxi mab  in  1997,  a chimeric  mAb  for  the  
treatment  of  B-cell non-Hodgkin’s  lymphoma. Trastuzumab,  in 1998, a human ized mAb for the treatment of 
HER2-expressing  breast cancer, quickly  followed.  Bevacizumab  was approved  in 2004 for treating colorectal 
cancer and is a tumor angiogenesis inhibitor that binds to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).  Same year was 
approved  Cetuximab,  which binds to epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR), for treating colorectal cancer and in 
2006 for treating head/neck cancer. , Recent studies have tried to encapsulate chemotherapeutic drugs into 
nanoparticles and then functionalize the particle surface with mAbs to maintain targeting efficacy [138, 180- 183].  
The conjugated  antibodies  enhance  uptake  and  cyto- toxic potency of the nanoparticles.  
 
Transferrin receptors are overexpressed on cell surfaces when metabolic processes are increased. It has been 
reported that the membrane transferrin receptor-mediated  endocytosis of the complex of transferrin-bound iron and 
transferrin receptor is the major route of cellular iron uptake via clathrin- coated pits, with subsequent traffic to 
endosomal compart ments. This uptake pathway has been successfully  exploited for the delivery of anti-tumor drugs, 
proteins, and therapeutic genes [184-187].  
 
Aptamers are RNA or DNA oligonucleotides capable of binding to target antigens with specificity analogous to 
anti- bodies  thanks  to  their  unique  three-dimensional  conforma tions  originated  by  intramolecular  interactions.  
They  have many favorable characteristics including small size (20 to 80 bases), lack of immunogenicity,  and ease 
of isolation [188]. The most important success of aptamers so far has been the development  of  FDA-approved   
aptamers  that  are  able  to bind VEGF, a protein involved in angiogenesis [189]. The conjugation  of  aptamers  to  
drug-delivery  nanoparticles  resulted in improved targeting and more efficient therapeutics, as well as more selective 
diagnostics [190].  
 
Hyaluronic acid (or hyaluronan) (HA) is a linear, nega tively charged and natural polysaccharide found in the 
extracellular matrix and synovial fluids of the body. It is responsible  for various functions  within the extracellular  
matrix such as cell growth, differentiation, and migration. It has been shown that the HA level is elevated  in 
various cancer cells. The higher concentration of HA in cancer cells is believed to form a less dense matrix, thus 
enhancing cell’s motility as well as its ability to invade other tissues. Hyaluronic acid has been investigated as a 
targeting moiety of the drug conjugates or nanoparticles for cancer therapy, because it can specifically  bind  to  
various  cancer  cells  that  over-express CD44, an HA receptor [191-193]. Folic acid belongs to the vitamin B family 
but it is not produced endogenously  by mammalian  cells. It is important in the formation of new cells because is an 
essential precur sor for the synthesis of nucleic acids and some amino acids. Folate requires internalization by cells 
via either receptor- mediated endocytosis or a carrier-based uptake mechanism. There  are two  membrane-bound  folic  
acid  receptors,  FR-a and FR-p. FR-a is overexpressed in a large number of human cancer tumors including 
malignancies of the ovary, brain, kidney, breast, and lung and it has a high affinity  for folic acid, which results in 
high uptake by FR-positive cells [194]. Folic acid binds to tumor cells 20-times more than to normal epithelial cells 
or fibroblasts. Because of these attractive characteristics,  folate conjugation has become a widely used strategy for 
targeting drug-delivery systems [137, 195-198].  
 
The functionalization of nanoparticles with peptides presents the advantage that high-affinity sequences can be 
dis- covered through screening of combinatorial libraries. Cell permeating and fusogenic peptides from pathogens 
or toxins and peptides, randomly derived from technologies such as phagedisplay, are also commonly used as 
targeting moieties [199].  Among  single  nuclear  localization  (NLS)  peptides, trans-activating  transcriptional  
activator  (TAT)  peptide  has been shown to be an efficient molecule for translocating nanoparticles into cell nuclei 
via the binding of import recep tors, importin a and p. In a recent publication  a peptide has been used to conjugate 
onto mesoporous silica nanoparticles for nuclear-targeted drug delivery of doxorubicin for the first time  [200].  
 
Lipid  nanoparticles  targeted  with  peptides  are among the most often studied [201].  
 
4.  INTRAVENOUSLY  ADMINISTERED  NAN OPARTICLES 
 
For  parenterally   administered   drugs,  Interactions  with blood  components,  kinetics  and  systemic  
distribution   are very important for parenterally administered drugs. In a intravenous treatment, therapeutic agents 
will find biological barriers such as hepatic and renal clearance, enzymolysis and hydrolysis,  cellular  uptake,  
endosomal/lysosomal   degrada tion, and spleen filtration. In the case of anticancer drugs, the efficiency is also 
influenced by their poor solubility, low stability, and high toxicity for normal cells.  
 
Nanomaterial   carriers  can  improve  the  biodistribution and prolonged blood circulation of therapeutics,  
thereby sig- nificantly  increasing  drug efficacy,  and decreasing  the dos- age. When  nanoparticles  are parenteral  
administered  the in vivo fate of a drug is determined by the type of the drug- delivery system, not by the drug 
properties. Examples of different  nanostructured  carrier  systems  and  the  properties that  influence  their  
suitability  for parenteral  administration are shown in (Table 1). 
The filtration of blood through the kidneys effectively removes  nanoparticles  with  diameters  smaller  than  
10-20 nm, and the filtration through inter-endothelial  slits in walls of the splenic  sinus removes  particles  larger  
than 200 nm. Liver fenestrations found in the sinusoids also temporarily remove nanoparticles  from the circulation.  
These blood filters  suggest  that  the  size  of  nanoparticles   should  be  no smaller than 20 nm and no larger 
than 200 nm if long circu lation within the blood is desired. The mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS), comprised 
of phagocytic   cells,  primarily   monocytes   and  macrophages, plays a vital role in clearing the nanoparticles. 
MPS has large populations  residing  in the spleen,  liver,  and lymph  nodes. The recognition of nanoparticles by 
these cells is greatly enhanced   following   a  process   called   opsonization.   This process is the adsorption of 
protein entities capable of inter- acting  with  specific  plasma-membrane  receptors  on mono cytes and various 
subsets of tissue macrophages, thus, promoting particle recognition by these cells [211]. On the other hand, the 
absence of opsonins in the adsorption  pattern and the presence of dysopsonins  lead to the circulation  of parti cles 
in the bloodstream. Properties such as nanoparticle size, surface    charge,    hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity,    
elasticity [212, 213] and the steric effects of particle coating can dictate  nanoparticle   compatibility   with   the  
immune   system [214]. Hajipour et al. have recently shown that plasma samples from humans with different 
diseases influence the deco- ration of the proteins that adsorb onto the nanoparticles, introducing the pioneering 
concept of “personalized protein corona” [215].  
 
4.1. Biomolecular Corona: What  Cells See of Particles? 
 
When  nanosystems  are in a physiological  environment, they rapidly adsorb biomolecules such as proteins and 
lipids onto their surface, forming a biomolecular “corona” (Fig. 6), an interface  organization  that  may  be  loosely  
divided  into two components termed the “hard” and “soft” coronas, with (respectively)   “long”  and  “short”  typical  
exchange  times. The  corona  will  change  composition   if  the  nanoparticle moves to another compartment  or 
fluid. Tenzer et al. found that the corona  formed  rapidly  after the particles  had been mixed with plasma and it 
could be detected even at the first measurement point (at 30 s) [216].  
 
This corona surrounding the particle changes its original surface  charge  and  chemistry,  size,  solubility,  
aggregation and, hence, it changes the dialogue of nanoparticles with the cells, influencing  the trafficking, in vivo 
biodistribution  and cellular uptake because these proteins adsorbed onto the sur- face interact with cells through 
receptors on cell plasma membrane [217]. The protein corona influences macrophage capture since proteins  involved  
in the process of opsonization  (opsonins) can be adsorbed onto the nanoparticle surface. Macrophage scavenger  
receptors are a broad group of phagocytic  recep tors that are responsible for the elimination of blood-borne viruses, 
pathogens, and negatively charged ligands. For ex- ample, opsonins such as IgG, complement factors, and fi- brinogen 
promote the phagocytosis, removal of nanoparticles from  the  bloodstream  and  concentration  in  the  liver  and 
spleen, while dyopsonins such as albumin and apolipoprotein help the longer circulation of nanoparticles in the body 
[94]. Human serum albumin, when adsorbed onto the surface of polystyrene microparticles, was reported to inhibit 
their phagocytosis by dendritic cells [218].  
 
For many NPs, while removal from the bloodstream is a question of minutes,  interaction  with cells of distant 
organs may be relevant hours or days after exposure. Nanoparticles functionalized  with hydrophilic polymers 
such as polyethyl ene glycol (PEG) and poloxamers show improved circulation lifetime properties and decreased 
macrophage recognition of many types of nanoparticles by preventing protein absorption [219,  220].  Plasma-
protein  absorption  is  influenced  in  the case of PEGylated nanoparticles by the length and density of the polymer.  
 
It has been claimed that the protein corona can cover/eliminate the targeting moieties on the surface of 
nanomaterials and, thus, strongly reduces the targeting capa bility and recognition of the targeting ligand by cellular 
receptors  [221].  Therefore,  understanding  the  interaction  of cell plasma membrane and the biomolecular corona 
around nanoparticles is essential in designing nanoparticle-based targeting drug delivery and treatments.  
 
4.2. “Passports” to Avoid Immune-system Clearance 
 
Nanoparticles can be engineered to avoid the immune- system clearance and increase the circulating half-life in 
the blood. One important reason to search for this is to provide a long-circulating drug reservoir from which the 
  
drug can be released into the vascular compartment in a continuous and controlled manner.  
 
A relatively successful approach for prolonging the circul ation times of colloidal particles in the blood is to 
create a steric surface barrier of sufficient density. Poloxamers and poloxamines have been investigated to reduce 
adsorption of proteins  and blood  opsonins  and thereby  increase  the half- life of nanosystems.  Poloxamers,  also 
known  as Pluronic®, and  poloxamines   or  Tetronic®,  are  amphiphilic   nonionic block  polymers  of  
hydrophobic  propylene  oxide  (PO)  and hydrophilic ethylene oxide (EO). Poloxamers consist of a hydrophobic  
central  polyoxypropylene  (POP)  molecule, which is flanked on both sides by two hydrophilic chains of 
polyoxyethylene (POE) yielding structures of the (POE)a (POP)b (POE)a type, as shown in (Fig. 7). Poloxamines are 
tetrafunctional block copolymers with four POE–POP blocks joined  together  by a central ethylene  diamine bridge 
[222]. The absorption of these molecules onto the surface of the nanoparticles via their hydrophobic POP fragments 
provides stability  to  the  particle  suspension  by  a  repulsion  effect through a steric mechanism of stabilization, 
because this type of absorption leaves the hydrophilic POE extended outwards from the particle surface in a mobile 
state. Nanoparticles engineered  with  poloxamers  and  poloxamines   exhibit  reduced adsorption of proteins and 
blood opsonins [223] and, as  a  result,  they  resist  ingestion  by  phagocytic  scavenger cells and remain in the 
systemic circulation for prolonged periods.  
 
 
Another property presented by poloxamers and poloxam ines is the inhibition of multidrug resistance [224, 225]. 
This phenomenon  is the ability  of tumor  cells  to develop  resis tance to the cytotoxic effects of several chemically 
unrelated anticancer drugs, associated with the overexpression of proteins such as P-glycoprotein and multidrug-
resistance- associated protein [226].  
 
The addition of poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG) has been widely used to increase the circulating half-life of 
nanoparti cles, and it is the preferred method of “masking” nanoparti cles from immune recognition. This process is 
also known as PEGylation [227]. PEG is a linear polyether diol that shows a low degree of immunogenicity  and 
antigenicity [228]. The polymer backbone is basically chemically inert, and the terminal primary hydroxyl groups are 
available for derivatiza tion. Modification of nanoparticle surface with PEG and can be performed by adsorption, 
incorporation during the nanoparticle synthesis, or by covalently linking to the surface of nanoparticles [211]. The 
PEGylation can prevent interac tions between the particle surface and the plasma proteins, although adsorption is not 
completely avoided. Various studies have been conducted to determine how a change in the thickness and density of 
a PEG coating affects opsonization and biodistribution, showing that the extent of protein ad- sorption depends on the 
PEG size and grafting density [229] and suggesting conformational transition of PEGs between mushroom  and  
brush  states  when  PEG  density  increases [230, 231].  
 
Recent progress has shown that it may be possible to dis- guise nanomaterials  as “self”, avoiding  the blood 
clearance by phagocytic cells, by using a novel peptide sequence mim icking the “marker of self” CD47 protein 
[232].  
 
5. CLINICAL TRIALS AND MARKETED NANO MEDICINES 
 
A total number of 142 clinical trials are currently being conducted  or  have  been  completed  in  a wide  spectrum  
of tumors, in order to test the effect of several nanoparticles  in combination with chemotherapeutic and biological 
drugs (https://clinicaltrials.gov/). We have used the terms “nanoparticles and cancer therapy” when looking for this 
information.  
 
From all these studies, 108 use a paclitaxel albumin- stabilized  nanoparticle  formulation,  called  Nab-
paclitaxel. Nab-paclitaxel  is  a  novel  Cremophor®   EL-free,  non- crystalline,  amorphous,  albumin-bound  
nanoparticle  formu lation  of paclitaxel  suspended  in normal  saline.  Nab pacli taxel was approved by the US FDA 
in 2005 to treat breast cancer.  Paclitaxel  is  a  taxane  that  acts  as  antimicrotubule agent and possess excellent 
antitumor effects in several types of cancer [233]. However,  a main inconvenient  for the human use is the high 
hydrophobicity. Hence, it has been de- scribed that albumin-bound paclitaxel nanoparticles induce lower toxicities in 
comparison with other taxanes improving both efficacy and safety. As result, this nanoparticle formula tion can be 
used in combination  with other chemotherapeu tics or therapeutics regimes. In fact, when chemotherapy or radiation 
is combined with such nanoparticles,  the composi tion is more effective than other drugs combinations [234].  
 
Most  clinical  trials  using  Nab-paclitaxel  are  applied  to breast cancer as, for instance, the recently completed 
clinical trial identified as NCT00675259. This is a phase II trial in- vestigating  the side effects  and how well 
administration  of Nab-paclitaxel and carboplatin, together with the monoclonal antibody bevacizumab, works in 
treating women undergoing surgery for stage II or III breast cancer. The results show that neoadjuvant  
chemotherapy  (NCT)  with  weekly  Nab- paclitaxel and carboplatin, and twice per week bevacizumab, resulted in a 
pathologic complete response (pCR) rate and, consequently,  long-term outcomes. These results were supe rior  to  
the  historical  data  with  anthracycline/taxane- containing NCT and to carboplatin and taxane combinations in 
breast cancer patients HER2 - [235].  
 
Another active phase II trial is ongoing to determine the activity of Nab-paclitaxel plus lapatinib, an oral, 
reversible inhibitor  of  epidermal  growth  factor  receptor  (EGFR)  and HER2 tyrosine kinase, in the first- and 
second-line setting in women with HER2+ metastatic breast cancer (MBC) (NCT00709761). The initial results show 
a clinical benefit of this combination with respect to investigator-assessed  overall response rate in 32 patients (53%). 
 
The highest number of responses was partial response (28 patients; 47%). Four patients (7%) had a complete response 
and 10 patients (17%) showed disease stability. Moreover, the incidence and sever ity of adverse events for the 
combination treatment were in concordance with the safety profiles of lapatinib and Nab- paclitaxel.  These  
preliminary  results  suggest  high  efficacy and no further adverse effects [236].  
Some examples of other indications for Nab-paclitaxel include:  i)  melanoma  that  cannot  be  removed  by  
surgery used  in combination  with  Bevacizumab  and/or  Ipilimumab (an anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated 
antigen-4 mono- clonal antibody) (NCT02158520, NCT00626405) or with carboplatin (NCT00404235);  ii) patients 
with advanced pancreatic cancer do not responders to first-line therapy with gemcitabine (NCT00691054), in 
combination with Gemcit abine and/or radiation (NCT02427841), with sorafenib and virinostat (NCT02349867) or with 
certinib and cisplatin (NCT02227940)  among others; iii) patients with non-small- cell lung cancer (NSLCC) 
previously treated with chemo- therapy (NCT01620190),  in combination with chemotherapy (NCT00073723,  
NCT01872403,  NCT02503358,  NCT02016 209, NCT00729612) and/or radiotherapy (NCT00544648, 
NCT00553462); iv) head and neck cancer followed by or together  with  chemoradiation   (NCT01847326,   
NCT00851 877, NCT00736619).  
In addition, there are clinical trials based on other nanoparticle formulations. For example, BIND-014 are do- 
cetaxel nanoparticles composed of PLA-PEG and functional- ized with a targeting ligand for injectable suspension 
(WO2013044219  A1)  that  are  being  evaluated  in  patients with advanced solid tumors, including prostate cancer, 
head and neck carcinoma or NSLCC (NCT01103791, NCT01812746, NCT02479178, NCT01300533, and 
NCT01792479). Other trials include NBTXR3 crystalline nanoparticles  as intratumor injection, which are activated 
by radiation to generate electrons to destroy the cancer cells causing  less  damage  to  the  healthy  tissues.  These  50-
nm- sized sphere nanoparticles, such as hafnium oxide are functionalized with a negative surface, have been developed 
as selective   radio   enhancers   [237],  and  represent   a  break- through approach for the local treatment of solid 
tumors such as soft tissue sarcomas and head and neck cancer (NCT01946867, NCT02379845, NCT01433068). Other 
nanopharmaceutical  formulation, called CRLX101, has been designed consisting of cyclodextrin-based  polymer 
molecule and  camptothecin,  and  appears  to  concentrate  and  slowly release camptothecin in tumors over an 
extended period. CRLX101 inhibits tumor proliferation and angiogenesis showing high anti-tumor potential in heavily 
pre-treated or treatment-refractory solid-tumor [238]. Studies include the combination  with  standard  neoadjuvant  
therapies  capecit abine and radiation therapy to determine the maximum dose tolerated (phase Ib) and both disease-
free survival and over- all survival (phase II) in patients with rectal cancer (NCT02010567), the combination with 
bevacizumab for recurrent ovarian/tubal/peritoneal  cancer (NCT01652079)  or the use alone in locally advanced or 
metastatic NSCLC (NCT01380769).  
 
An ongoing clinical development includes a nanophar maceutical  formulation  based on antibody-linked  
nanoparti cles  by  attaching  monoclonal  antibodies  or  antibody  frag- ments to the surface of liposomes 
(immunoliposomes), this enabling  more  efficient  selective  binding  to  antigens  expressed  in  the  target  cells  
and  their  internalization.   This study employs anti-EGFR-immunoliposomes to selectively deliver doxorubicin  to 
EGFR-overexpressing  tumor cells in solid tumors (NCT01702129).  
Other active clinical trials use micellar nanoparticles such as padical (NCT00989131), NK105 (NCT01644890)  
or NC-6004  (NCT02240238),   minicells  containing  a  microRNA mimic (NCT023691989), cyclodextrin PEG-
based nanopar ticle  containing  siRNA  (CALAA-01)   (NCT00689065)   or carbon nanoparticles (NCT02123407).  
Several nano-formulated drugs have been evaluated, of which  a  few  have  already  been  approved  for  clinical  
use (Table 2) while others are undergoing  phase 2/3 clinical trials. This is due to their potential for toxicity to 
patients and to the environment,  the high cost of production,  and prema ture drug release. Conversely,  they have 
the ability to convert insoluble or poorly soluble drugs, avoiding toxic organic solvents in addition to decreasing 
the therapeutic dosage of conventional chemotherapy.  
 
CONCL USION 
 
In this review, we have evidenced the tremendous poten tial that smart  drug-delivery  systems  such  as 
nanoparticles have to enhance the therapeutic effect of current standard treatment modalities, including 
chemotherapies and radio- therapies. Increased numbers of nanoparticles are been developed and studied for their 
anti-cancer properties. Recent ongoing clinical trials add modifications for the selective targeting of cancer cells that 
will further improve the quality of life of cancer patients, by reducing the adverse effects of chemotherapeutic 
agents, and enhancing overall survival. Although  clinical  application  of  nanotechnology  has  only just started, 
additional studies are needed due to the great variability in growth and inner structure of tumors, including the 
microenvironment.  Therefore,  a better understanding  of the barriers that keep efficacy low, preventing uniform 
deliv ery  of nanoparticles  into  tumors  is needed  in order  to develop strategies  for further improvement  [239]. 
In addition, the adverse secondary effects range from inert to highly toxic due to the ample variety of nanomaterials 
available.  
 
Moreover, the increasingly widespread availability of affordable technologies has allowed a deeper 
understanding of cancer at the genetic level, leading to new paradigms that are improving  patient  outcomes  and 
helping  in treatment  decisions [8, 233, 240]. Since the molecular profiling of tumors in each person is unique, 
the selection of a specific targeted agent or a specific treatment regimen based on its individual molecular profile 
is generating great expectations both to oncologists as well as to patients. These characteristics make nanoparticles 
  
highly appropriate therapeutic strategy with application  in  targeted,  personalized  medicine,  where  they could 
transport large amount of drugs specifically into malignant cells avoiding undesired effects in healthy cells. This 
new era of individualized  or stratified medicine  allows that the right therapeutic regime is given to each patient 
speeding up clinical trials and, finally, resulting in the improvement of cancer patients [241].  
 
In addition, the development of novel nanoplatform- targeted   therapies   against   cancer   stem   cells,   which   
are involved  in chemoresistance,  recurrence  of the disease, and even on metastasis formation [242], will improve 
the clinical outcome for cancer patients.  
To have conclusive results concerning ongoing phase-I clinical trials assessing the safety and pharmacokinetics of 
nanoparticles formulations is vital in order to standardize the application  of treatments  based on smart drug-delivery  
systems to the daily clinical practice.  
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 
The authors confirm that this article content has no conflict of interest.  
 
ACK NOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This  work  was  supported  by  the  projects  MAT2013- 43922-R,    MAT2015-63644-C2-2-R,    (European    
FEDER support   included,   MINECO   Spain),   PI-0533-2014   (Fun- dación Progreso y Salud/Janssen  Cilag, Junta 
de Andalucía, Spain)    and    P07-FQM2496,    P10-CTS-6270    and    P07- FQM3099 (Junta de Andalucía, Spain). 
       
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Ferrari M. Cancer nanotechnology: opportun ities and challenges.Nat Rev Cancer 2005; 5: 161-71. 
[2]         Blanco E, Hsiao A, Mann AP, Landry MG, Meric-Bernstam F, Ferrari M. Nanomedicine in cancer therapy: innovative tren ds 
and prospects. Cancer Sci 2011; 102: 1247-52. 
[3] Wong KK, Liu XL. Nanomedicine: a primer for surgeons. PediatrSurg Int 2012; 28: 943-51. 
[4]         Phan JH, Moffitt RA, Stokes TH, et al. Convergence of biomark- ers, bioinformatics and nanotechnology for individua lized 
cancer treatment. Trends Biotechnol 2009; 27: 350-8. 
[5]         Venditto VJ, Szoka FC, Jr. Cancer nanomedicines: so many papers and so few drugs! Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2013; 65: 80-8 . 
[6] Sarker D, Workman P. Pharmacodynamic biomarkers for molecular cancer therapeutics. Adv Cancer Res 2007; 96: 213-68.  
[7]         Karimi  P,  Shahrokni A,  Ranjbar  MR.  Implementation of  pro- teomics for cancer research: past, present, and fut ure. Asian Pac J 
Cancer Prev 2014; 15: 2433-8. 
[8]         Siegel R, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J Clin 2015; 65: 5-29.[9]         Hanahan D, Weinb erg RA. 
Hallmarks of cancer: the next genera- tion. Cell 2011; 144: 646-74. 
[10] Sudhakar A. History of Cancer, Ancient and Modern Treatment Methods. J Cancer Sci Ther 2009; 1: 1-4. 
[11]       Mignani S, Bryszewska M, Klajnert-Maculewicz B, Zablocka M, Majoral JP. Advances in combination therapies based on n anopar- 
ticles for efficacious cancer treatment: an analytical report. Bio- macromolecules 2015; 16: 1-27. 
[12]       Ediriwickrema A, Saltzman WM. Nanotherapy for Cancer: Target- ing and Multifunctionality in the Future of Cancer The rapies. 
ACS Biomater Sci Eng 2015; 1: 64-78. 
[13]       Jain RK, Stylianopoulos T. Delivering nanomedicine to solid tu- mors. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2010; 7: 653-64. 
[14]       Jain TK, Morales MA, Sahoo SK, Leslie-Pelecky DL, Labhasetwar V. Iron oxide nanoparticles for sustained delivery of anticancer 
agents. Mol Pharm 2005; 2: 194-205. 
[15]       Uner M, Yener G. Importance of solid lipid nanoparticles (SLN) in various administration routes and future perspecti ves. Int J 
Nanomed 2007; 2: 289-300. 
[16]      Bramini M, Ye D, Hallerbach A, et al. Imaging approach to mechanistic study of nanoparticle interactions with the blo od-brain 
barrier. ACS Nano 2014; 8: 4304-12. 
[17]      Jabr-Milane LS, van Vlerken LE, Yadav S, Amiji MM. Multi- functional nanocarriers to overcome tumor drug resistance. Cancer 
Treat Rev 2008; 34: 592-602. 
[18]       Shapira A, Livney YD, Broxterman HJ, Assaraf YG. Nanomedi- cine for targeted cancer therapy: towards the overcoming of drug 
resistance. Drug Resist Updat 2011; 14: 150-63. 
[19] Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE. Multidrug resistance in cancer: role of ATP-dependent transporters. Nat Rev Cancer 2002; 2 : 
48-58. 
[20]     Cho KJ, Wang X, Nie SM, Chen Z, Shin DM. Therapeutic nanoparticles for drug delivery in cancer. Clin Cancer Research 2 008; 
14: 1310-6. 
[21]       Sahoo SK, Labhasetwar V. Enhanced antiproliferative activity of transferrin-conjugated paclitaxel-loaded nanoparticl es is 
mediated via sustained intracellular drug retention. Mol Pharm 2005; 2: 373-83. 
[22]       Lee ES, Na K, Bae YH. Doxorubicin loaded pH-sens itive polym- eric micelles for reversal of resistant MCF-7 tumor. J Control Re- 
lease 2005; 103: 405-18. 
[23]       Sahoo SK, Labhasetwar V. Nanotech approaches to delivery and imaging drug. Drug Discovery Today 2003; 8: 1112-20. 
[24]      Hervella P, Lozano V, Garcia-Fuentes M. Nanomedicine: New Challenges and Opportun ities in Cancer Therapy. Journal of Bio- 
medical Nanotechnology 2008; 4: 276-92. 
[25] Duncan R. Polymer conjugates as anticancer nanomedicines. Nat Rev Cancer 2006; 6: 688-701. 
[26] Garcia-Fuentes M, Alonso MJ. Chitosan-based drug nanocarriers: Where do we stand? Journal of Controlled Release 2012; 161:  496-
504. 
[27] Wang X, Li S, Shi Y, et al. The development of site-specific drug delivery nanocarriers based on receptor mediation. J Con trol Re- 
lease 2014; 193: 139-53. 
[28] Jia F, Liu X, Li L, Mallapragada S, Narasimhan B, Wang Q. Multi-functional nanoparticles for targeted delivery of immune a ctivating 
and cancer therapeutic agents. J Control Release 2013; 172: 1020-34. 
 
[29]       Pinto Reis C, Neufeld RJ, Ribeiro AJ, Veiga F. Nanoencapsulation I. Methods for preparation of drug-loaded polymeric  
nanoparticles. Nanomedicine 2006; 2: 8-21. 
[30]      Sun L, Wu Q, Peng F, Liu L, Gong C. Strategies of polymeric nanoparticles for enhanced internalization in cancer ther apy. Col- 
loids Surf B Biointerfaces 2015; 135: 56-72. 
[31]       Wang CE, Stayton PS, Pun SH, Convertine AJ. Polymer Nanos- tructures Synthesized by Controlled Living Polymerization  for 
Tumor-Targeted Drug Delivery. J Control Release 2015 Sep 2. 
[32]       Jang MK, Jeong YI, Nah JW. Characterization and preparation of core-shell type nanoparticle for encapsulation of ant icancer 
drug. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2010; 81: 530-6. 
[33]       Mottaghitalab F, Farokhi M, Shokrgozar MA, Atyabi F, Hosseink- hani H. Silk fibroin nanoparticle as a novel drug del ivery system. 
J Control Release 2015; 206: 161-76. 
[34]       Brigger I, Dubernet C, Couvreur P. Nanoparticles in cancer therapy and diagnosis. Adv Drug Deliver Rev 2012 ; 64: 24 -36. 
[35] Lee JH, Nan A. Combination drug delivery approaches in metas-tatic breast cancer. J Drug Deliv 2012; 2012: 915375. 
[36]      Chatterjee K, Sarkar S, Jagajjanani Rao K, Paria S. Core/shell nanoparticles in biomedical applications. Adv Colloid 
Interface Sci 2014; 209: 8-39. 
[37] Hoffman AS. Hydrogels for biomedical applications. Adv Drug Deliver Rev 2012; 64: 18-23. [38]       Bettinger CJ, Weinberg EJ, Kulig KM, et al. Three-Dimensional Microfluidic Tissue-Engineering Scaffolds Using a Flex ible 
Biode- gradable Polymer. Adv Mater 2005; 18: 165-9. 
[39] Song HH, Park KM, Gerecht S. Hydrogels to model 3D in vitro  microenvironment of tumor vascularization. Adv Drug Deliv Rev  
2014; 79-80: 19-29. 
[40]       Saboktakin  MR,  Tabatabaei  RM.  Supramolecular hydrogels  as drug delivery systems. Int J Biol Macromol 2015; 75: 426-36. 
[41]       Cheng Y, He C, Ding J, Xiao C, Zhuang X, Chen X. Thermosensi- tive hydrogels based on polypeptides for localized and  
sustained delivery of anticancer drugs. 
Biomaterials 2013; 34: 10338-47. 
[42]       Seo HW, Kim da Y, Kwon DY, et al. Injectable intratumoral hy- drogel as 5-fluorouracil drug depot. Biomaterials 2013 ; 34: 
2748- 
57. 
[43]       Kesharwani P KJ, Narendra Kumar Jain. Dendrimer as nanocarrier for drug delivery. Progress in Polymer Science. 2013.  
[44] Dufes C, Uchegbu IF, Schatzlein AG. Dendrimers in gene delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2005; 57: 2177-202. 
[45]       Mintzer MA, Grinstaff MW. Biomedical applications of dendrim- ers: a tutorial. Chem Soc Rev 2011; 40: 173-90. 
[46]       McCarthy JM, Appelhans D, Tatzelt J, Rogers MS. Nanomedicine for prion disease treatment: new insights into the role  of 
dendrim- ers. Prion 2013; 7: 198-202. 
[47]       Peng J, Wu Z, Qi X, Chen Y, Li X. Dendrimers as potential thera- peutic tools in HIV inhibition. Molecules 2013; 18:  7912-29. 
[48] Somani S, Blatchford DR, Millington O, Stevenson ML, Dufes C. Transferrin-bearing polypropylenimine dendrimer for targeted gene 
delivery to the brain. J Control Release 2014; 188: 78-86. 
[49] Rata-Aguilar A, Maldonado-Valderrama J, Jódar-Reyes A, Ortega-Vinuesa J, Santoyo-González F, Martín-Rodríguez A. Improved 
DNA c ondensation, stab ility, and transfection with alkyl sulfonyl- functionalized PAMAM G2. J Nanopart Res 2015; 17: 198-209. 
[50]       Lee CC, Gillies ER, Fox ME, et al. A single dose of doxorubicin- functionalized bow-tie dendrimer cures mice bearing  C-26 colon 
carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103: 16649-54. 
[51]       Ren Y, Kang CS, Yuan XB, et al. Co-delivery of as-miR-21 and 5- FU by poly(amidoamine) dendrimer attenuates human gl ioma 
cell growth in vitro. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 2010; 21: 303-14. 
[52]       Zhang MG, Shi XY. Folic acid-modified dendrimer-DOX conju- gates for targeting cancer chemotherapy. J Control Releas e 
2013 Nov 28; 172: E55-E6. 
[53]       Kaminskas LM, McLeod VM, Ryan GM, et al. Pulmonary admini- stration of a doxorubicin-conjugated dendrimer enhances d rug 
ex- posure to lung metastases and improves cancer therapy. J Control Release 2014; 183: 18-26. 
[54]       Mikhail AS, Eetezadi S, Ekdawi SN, Stewart J, Allen C. Image- based analysis of the size- and time-dependent penetra tion of 
po- lymeric micelles in multicellular tumor spheroids and tumor xenografts. Int J Pharm 2014; 464: 168-77. 
[55] Eetezadi S,  Ekdawi SN, Allen C.  The challenges facing block copolymer micelles for cancer therapy: In vivo barriers and clinical 
translation. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2015; 91: 7-22. 
[56] Rapoport N, Gupta R, Kim YS, O'Neill BE. Polymeric micelles and nanoemulsions as tumor-targeted drug carriers: Insight thr ough in- 
travital imaging. J Control Release 2015; 206: 153-60. 
[57] Wei H, Zhuo RX, Zhang XZ. Design and development of polymeric micelles with cleavable links for intracellular drug deliver y. 
Progress in Polymer Science 2013; 38: 503-35. 
[58] Kang Y, Ha W, Zhang S, Li BJ. Studies on pH-sensitive high drug loading prodrug micelles for anticancer drug delivery. J C ontrol 
Release 2013; 172: E81-E2. 
[59] Wang T, Petrenko VA, Torchilin VP. Paclitaxel-Loaded Polymeric Micelles Modified with MCF-7 Cell-Specific Phage Protein: E n- 
hanced Binding to Target Cancer Cells and Increased Cytotoxicity. Mol Pharm 2010; 7: 1007-14. 
[60] Ke XY, Lin Ng VW, Gao SJ, Tong YW, Hedrick JL, Yang YY. 
Co-delivery of thioridazine and doxorubicin using polymeric mi- celles for targeting both cancer cells and cancer stem cells. 
Bioma- terials 2014; 35: 1096-108. 
[61]       Li YF, Yang FF, Chen W, et al. Small-sized polymeric micelles preventing malignant breast cancer metastasis. J Contr ol 
Release 
2013; 172: E92-E.  
[62] Hu Q, Rijcken CJ, Bansal R, Hennink WE, Storm G, Prakash J.Complete regression of breast tumour with a single dose of do- 
cetaxel-entrapped core-cross-linked polymeric micelles. Biomateri- als 2015; 53: 370-8. 
[63]       Garcea RL, Gissmann L. Virus-like particles as vaccines and ves- sels for the delivery of small molecules. Current O pinion in Bio- 
technology 2004; 15: 513-7. 
[64] Aljabali AA, Shukla S, Lomonossoff GP, Steinmetz NF, Evans DJ. CPMV-DOX delivers. Mol Pharm 2013; 10: 3-10. 
[65] Zhao Q, Chen W, Chen Y, Zhang L, Zhang J, Zhang Z. Self-assembled virus-like particles from rotavirus structural protein VP6 
for targeted drug delivery. Bioconjug Chem 2011; 22: 346-52. 
[66] Ma YJ, Nolte RJM, Cornelissen JJLM. Virus-based nanocarrie rs for drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliver Rev 2012; 64: 811-25. 
[67]       Melcher A, Parato K, Rooney CM, Bell JC. Thunder and Light- ning: Immunotherapy and  Oncolytic Viruses Collide. Mol 
Ther 
2011; 19: 1008-16. 
[68]       Tysome JR, Briat A, Alusi G, et al. Lister strain of vaccinia virus armed with endostatin-angiostatin fusion gene as a novel 
therapeu- tic agent for human pancreatic cancer. Gene Ther 2009 Oct; 16: 
1223-33. 
[69] Dave RV, Jebar AH, Jennings VA, et al. Viral warfare! Fron t-line defence and arming the immune system against cancer using onco- 
lytic vaccinia and other viruses. Surgeon 2014; 12: 210-20.[70] Jefferson A, Cadet VE, Hielscher A. The mechanisms of 
geneti cally modified vaccinia viruses for the treatment of cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2015; 95: 407-16. 
[71] Sahithi K, Swetha M, Ramasamya K, Sriniyasan N, Selyamu rugan N. Polymeric composites containing carbon nanotubes for bone tis- 
sue engineering. nternational Journal of Biological Macromole- cules 2010; 46: 281-3. 
[72]       Bianco A, Kostarelos K, Prato M. Applications of carbon nano- tubes in drug delivery. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2005; 9(6) : 674-9. 
  
[73] Bussy C, Ali-Boucetta H, Kostarelos K. Safety considerations forgraphene: lessons learnt from carbon nanotubes. Acc Chem Res 
2013; 46: 692-701. 
[74] Amenta V, Aschberger K. Carbon nanotubes: potential medical applications and safety concerns. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed 
Nanobiotechnol 2015; 7: 371-86. 
[75] Fabbro C, Ali-Boucetta H, Da Ros T, Kostarelos K, Bianco A Prato M. Targeting carbon nanotubes against cancer. Chem Com- 
mun 2012; 48: 3911-26. 
[76] Meng LJ, Zhang XK, Lu QH, Fei ZF, Dyson PJ. Single walled carbon nanotubes as drug delivery vehicles: Targeting doxorubicin 
to tumors. Biomaterials 2012; 33: 1689-98. 
[77] Herrero MA, Toma FM, Al-Jamal KT, et al. Synthesis and Charac terization of a Carbon Nanotube-Dendron Series for Efficient 
siRNA Delivery (vol 131, pg 9843, 2009). J Am Chem Soc 2010; 132: 1731-. 
[78]       Liu Z, Chen K, Davis C, Sherlock S, Cao Q, Chen X, et al. Drug delivery with carbon nanotubes for in vivo cancer treatment. Cancer 
Res 2008; 68: 6652-60. 
[79]      Lee PC, Chiou YC, Wong JM, Peng CL, Shieh MJ. Targeting colorectal cancer cells with single-walled carbon nanotubes c onju- 
gated to anticancer agent SN-38 and EGFR antibody. Biomaterials 
2013; 34: 8756-65. 
[80]       Torchilin VP. R ecent advances with liposomes as pharmaceutical carriers. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2005; 4: 145-60. 
[81]       Perez-Herrero E, Fernandez-Medarde A. Advanced targeted thera- pies in cancer: Drug nanocarriers, the future of chem otherapy. 
Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2015; 93: 52-79. 
[82]       Allen TM, Cullis PR. Liposomal drug delivery systems: from con- cept to clinical applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2013; 65: 36-48. 
[83] Pattni  BS,  Chupin  VV,  Torch ilin  VP.  New  Developments  in Liposomal Drug Delivery. Chem Rev 2015 May 26. 
[84]       Northfelt  DW,  Dezube  BJ,  Thommes  JA,  et  al.   Pegylated- liposomal doxorubicin versus doxorubicin, bleomycin,  and 
vincris- tine in the treatment of AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma: Results of a randomized phase III clinical trial. J Clin Oncol  1998; 
16: 2445- 51. 
[85]       Rodriguez  MA,  Pytlik  R,  Kozak  T,  et  al.  Vincristine  sulfate liposomes injection (Marqibo) in heavily pretre ated patients 
with refractory aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma: report of the pivotal phase 2 study. Cancer 2009; 115: 3475-82. 
[86]       Natarajan JV, Nugraha C, Ng  XW, Venkatraman S. Sustained- release from nanocarriers: a review. J Control Release 20 14; 
193: 
122-38. 
[87] Estanqueiro  M,  Amaral  MH,  Conceicao  J,  Sousa  Lobo  JM.Nanotechnologicalcarriers for cancer chemotherapy: the state of 
the art. Colloids Surf B 
Biointerfaces 2015; 126: 631-48. 
[88] Ozpolat B, Sood AK, Lopez-Berestein G. Liposomal siRNA nanocarriers for cancer therapy. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2014; 66: 110-6 . [ 
[89] Chang  M,  Lu  S,  Zhang  F,  et  al.  RGD-modified pH-sensitive liposomes for docetaxel tumor targeting. Colloids Surf B 
Biointerfaces. 2015 May 1; 129: 175-82. 
[90]      Wang L, Geng D, Su H. Safe and efficient pH sensitive tumor targeting modified liposomes with minimal cytotoxicity. C olloids 
Surf B Biointerfaces. 2014 Nov 1; 123: 395-402. 
[91]       Kono K, Takashima M, Yuba E, Harada A, Hiramatsu Y, Kitagawa H, et al. Multifunctional liposomes having target speci ficity, tem- 
perature-triggered release, and near-infrared fluorescence imaging for tumor-specific chemotherapy. J Control Release. 2015 Aug  8; 
216: 69-77. 
[92]       Weber S, Zimmer A, Pardeike J. Solid Lipid Nanoparticles (SLN) and Nanostructured Lipid Carriers (NLC) for pulmonary  
applica- tion: a review of the state of the art. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2014 
Jan; 86: 7-22. 
[93]       Lim SB, Banerjee A, Onyuksel H. Improvement of drug safety by the use of lipid-based nanocarriers. Journal of Contro lled 
Release. 2012 Oct 10; 163: 34-45. 
[94]       Joshi MD, Muller RH. Lipid nanoparticles for parenteral delivery of actives. European Journal of Pharmaceutics and 
Biopharmaceu- tics. 2009 Feb; 71: 161-72. 
[95]       Parveen S, Misra R, Sahoo SK. Nanoparticles: a boon to drug de- livery, therapeutics, diagnostics and imaging. Nanom ed- 
Nanotechnol. 2012 Feb; 8: 147-66. 
[96]       Mehnert W, Mader K. Solid lipid nanoparticles: production, char- acterization and applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2001 Apr 
25; 47: 165-96. 
[97]       Harivardhan  Reddy  L,  Sharma  RK,  Chuttani  K,  Mishra  AK, Murthy RS. Influence of administration route on tumor  uptake and 
biodistribution of etoposide loaded solid lipid nanoparticles in Dalton's lymphoma tumor bearing mice. J Control Release 2005; 
105: 185-98. 
[98] Paliwal R, Rai S, Vaidya B, Khatri K, Goyal AK, Mishra N, et al. Effect  of  lipid  core  material  on  characteristics  of  solid  lipid 
nanoparticles designed for oral lymphatic delivery. Nanomedicine 2009; 5: 184-91. 
[99]       Zara GP, Bargoni A, Cavalli R, Fundaro A, Vighetto D, Gasco MR. Pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of idarubic in-
loaded solid lipid nanoparticles after duodenal administration to rats. J Pharm Sci 2002; 91: 1324-33. 
[100] Miao J, Du YZ, Yuan H, Zhang XG, Hu FQ. Drug resistance rever- 
sal activity of anticancer drug loaded solid lipid nanoparticles in multi-drug resistant cancer cells. Colloids Surf  B  Bioint erfaces 
2013; 110: 74-80. 
[101]    Aznar MA, Lasa-Saracibar B, Estella-Hermoso de Mendoza A, Blanco-Prieto MJ. Efficacy of edelfosine lipid nanoparticles  in 
breast cancer cells. Int J Pharm 2013; 454: 720-6. 
[102]     Cai S, Yang QH, Bagby TR, Forrest ML. Lymphatic drug delivery using  engineered liposomes  and  solid  lipid  nanopar ticles. Adv 
Drug Deliver Rev 2011; 63: 901-8. 
[103] Taratula  O,  Kuzmov  A,  Shah  M,  Garbuzenko  OB,  Minko  T. Nanostructured lipid carriers as multifunctional nanomedic ine plat- 
form for pulmonary co-delivery of anticancer drugs and siRNA. J Control Release. 2013 Nov 10; 171: 349-57. 
[104]    de Jesus M, Zuhorn I. Solid lipid nanoparticles as nucleic acid delivery system: properties and molecular mechanisms. J Control 
Release. 2015; 10 201:1-13. 
[105]     Luo Y, Teng Z, Li Y, Wang Q. Solid lipid nanoparticles for oral drug delivery: chitosan coating improves stability, c ontrolled deliv- 
ery, mucoadhesion and cellular uptake. Carbohydr Polym. 2015 May 20; 122: 221-9. 
[106] Luan J, Yang X, Chu L, Xi Y, Zhai G. PEGylated long circulating nanostructured lipid carriers for Amoitone B: preparation , cytotox- 
icity and intracellular uptake. J Colloid Interface Sci. 2014 Aug 15; 428: 49-56. 
[107]     Fernandez P, Andre V, Rieger J, Kuhnle A. Nano-emulsion forma- tion by emulsion phase inversion. Colloids and Surface s a- 
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects. 2004 Dec 20; 251: 53-8. 
[108]     Uson N, Garcia MJ, Solans C. Formation of water-in-oil (W/O) nano-emulsions in a water/mixed non-ionic surfactant/oil  
systems prepared by a low-energy emulsification method. Colloids and Sur-faces a-Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects. 2004 
Dec 10; 
250: 415-21. 
[109]    Wang LJ, Li XF, Zhang GY, Dong JF, Eastoe J. Oil-in-water nanoemulsions for pesticide formulations. Journal of Colloid  and 
Interface Science. 2007 Oct 1; 314: 230-5. 
[110] Mason  TG,  Wilking  JN,  Meleson  K,  Chang  CB,  Graves  SM. 
Nanoemulsions:  formation,  structure,  and  physical  properties. 
 
Journal of Physics-Condensed Matter 2006; 18: R635-R66. 
[111]     Sainsbury F, Zeng B, Middelberg A. Towards designer nanoemul- sions for precision delivery of therapeutics. Curr Opin  Chem 
Eng 
2014; 4: 11-7. 
[112]     Anton N, Benoit JP, Saulnier P. Design and production of nanopar- ticles formulated from nano-emulsion templates-a review. J 
Control Release 2008; 128: 185-99. 
[113]    Anton N, Vandamme TF. The universality of low-energy nano- emulsification. Int J Pharm 2009; 377: 142-7. 
[114] Anton N, Vandamme TF. Nano-emulsions and micro-emul sions: 
clarifications of the critical differences. Pharm Res 2011; 28: 978- 
85. 
[115]     He W, Lu Y, Qi J, Chen L, Hu F, Wu W. Nanoemulsion-templated shell-crosslinked nanocapsules as drug delivery systems.  Int J 
Pharm 2013; 445: 69-78. 
[116]     Kothamasu P, Kanumur H, Ravur N, Maddu C, Parasuramrajam R, Thangavel S. Nanocapsules: the weapons for novel drug 
delivery systems. Bioimpacts 2012; 2: 71-81. 
[117]     Hirsjarvi S, Dufort S, Gravier J, et al. Influence of size, surface coating and fine chemical composition on the in v itro reactivity 
and in vivo biodistribution of lipid nanocapsules versus lipid nanoemul- sions in cancer models. Nanomedicine 2013; 9: 375-87. 
[118]     Zhang Y, Chan HF, Leong KW. Advanced materials and process- ing for drug delivery: the past and the future. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 
2013; 65: 104-20. 
[119] Fryd MM, Mason TG. Advanced nanoemulsions. Annu Rev Phys Chem 2012; 63: 493-518. 
[120]     Mosqueira VC, Legrand P, Barratt G. Surface-modified and con- ventional nanocapsules as novel formulations for parent eral 
deliv- ery of halofantrine. J Nanosci Nanotechnol 2006; 6: 3193-202. 
[121]     Santander-Ortega  MJ,  Lozano-Lopez  MV,  Bastos-Gonzalez  D, Peula-Garcia JM, Ortega-Vinuesa JL. Novel core-shell li pid- 
chitosan and lipid-poloxamer nanocapsules: stability by hydration forces. Colloid Polym Sci 2010; 288: 159-72. 
[122]     Lazaridis N, Alexopoulos A, Chatzi E, Kiparissides C. Steric stabi- lization in emulsion polymerization using oligome ric nonionic sur- 
factants. Chem Eng Sci 1999; 54: (15-6):3251-61. 
[123]     Veronese FM, Pasut G. PEGylation, successful approach to drug delivery. Drug Discov Today 2005; 10: 1451-8. 
[124]     Porter CJ, Pouton CW, Cuine JF, Charman WN. Enhancing intesti- nal drug solubilisation using lipid-based delivery sys tems. Adv 
Drug Deliv Rev 2008; 60: 673-91. 
[125] Muller RH, Schmidt S, Bu ttle I, Akkar A, Schmitt J, Bromer S.SolEmuls (R) - novel technology for the formulation of i.v. emul- 
sions with poorly soluble drugs. Int J Pharm 2004; 269: 293-302. 
[126] Mason  TG,  Wilking  JN,  Meleson  K,  Chang  CB,  Graves  SM. Nanoemulsions: formation, structure, and physical properties (vol 
19, pg 079001, 2007). Journal of Physics-Condensed Matter 2007 
Feb 21; 19. 
[127]     Felice B, Prabhakaran MP, Rodriguez AP, Ramakrishna S. Drug delivery vehicles on a nano-engineering perspective. Mater Sci 
Eng C Mater Biol Appl 2014; 41: 178-95. 
[128]     Feng L, Mumper RJ. A critical review of lipid-based nanoparticles for taxane delivery. Cancer Lett 2013; 334: 157-75.  
[129]     Huynh NT, Passirani C, Saulnier P, Benoit JP. Lipid nanocapsules: A new platform for nanomedicine. Int J Pharm 2009; 379: 201-9. 
[130] Shakeel F, Baboota S, Ahuja A, Ali J, Shafiq S. Celecoxib nanoe mulsion: Skin permeation mechanism and bioavailability assess- 
ment. J Drug Target 2008; 16: 733-40. 
[131] Tiwari SB, Amiji MM. Improved oral delivery of paclitaxel following   administration  in   nanoemulsion  formulations.  J   
Nanosci Nanotechnol 2006; 6: 3215-21. 
[132] Elnaggar YS, El-Massik MA, Abdallah OY. Self-nanoemul sifying drug delivery systems of tamoxifen citrate: design and optimiza- 
tion. Int J Pharm 009; 380: 133-41. 
[133] Elsheikh MA, Elnaggar YSR, Gohar EY, Abdallah OY. Nanoemul sion liquid preconcentrates for raloxifene hydrochloride: optimiza- 
tion and in vivo appraisal. Int J Nanomed 2012; 7: 3787-802. 
[134] Cevc G, Vierl U. Nanotechnology and the transdermal route: A state of the art review and cr itical appraisal. J Control Release 
2010; 141: 277-99. 
[135] Alayoubi AY, Anderson JF, Satyanarayanajois SD, Sylvester PW, Nazzal S. Concurrent delivery of tocotrienols and simvastat in by 
lipid nanoemulsions potentiates their antitumor activity against human mammary adenocarcenoma cells. Eur J Pharm Sci 2013; 48: 
385-92. 
[136]     Zhao H, Lu H, Gong T, Zhang ZR. Nanoemulsion loaded with lycobetaine-oleic acid ionic complex: physicochemical 
characteris- tics, in vitro, in vivo evaluation, and antitumor activity. Int J Nanomed 2013; 8: 1959-73. 
[137] Rata-Aguilar A, Sanchez-Moreno P, Jodar-Reyes AB, et al. Colloi- 
dal stability and "in vitro" antitumor targeting ability of lipid nano- capsules coated by folate-chitosan conjugates. Journal of 
Bioactive and Compatible Polymers 2012; 27: 388-404. 
[138]     Sanchez-Moreno P, Ortega-Vinuesa JL, Boulaiz H, Marchal JA, Peula-Garcia JM. Synthesis and Characterization of Lipid 
Immuno- Nanocapsules for Directed Drug Delivery: Selective Antitumor Ac- tivity against HER2 Positive Breast-Cancer Cells. 
Biomacro- molecules 2013; 14: 4248-59. 
[139] Savage DJ, Liu XW, Curley SA, Ferrari M, Serda RE. Porous silicon  advances in  drug  delivery and  immunotherapy. Curren t 
Opinion in Pharmacology 2013; 13: 834-41. 
[140] Faraji AH, Wipf P. Nanoparticles in cellular drug delivery. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry 2009; 17: 2950-62. 
[141]     Kar M,  Tiwari N, Tiwari M, Lahiri M,  Sen  Gupta S.  Poly-L- Arginine Grafted Silica Mesoporous Nanoparticles for 
Enhanced Cellular Uptake and their Application in DNA Delivery and Con- trolled Drug Release. Particle & Particle Systems Characterization 2013; 30: 166-79. 
[142] Ferris DP, Lu J, Gothard C, Yanes R, Thomas CR, Olsen JC, et 
al. Synthesis of Biomolecule-Modified Mesoporous Silica Nanoparti- 
cles for Targeted Hydrophobic Drug Delivery to Cancer Cells. Small 2011; 7: 1816-26. 
[143]     Moreno-Vega  A,  Gómez-Quintero  T,  Núñez-Anita  R,  Acosta- Torres L, Castaño V. Polymeric and Ceramic Nanoparticle s in 
Biomedical Applications. J Nanotechnol 2012. 
[144]    Roy I, Ohulchanskyy TY, Pudavar HE, et al. Ceramic-based nanoparticles entrapping water-insoluble photosensitizing ant ican- cer 
drugs: A novel drug-carrier system for photodynamic therapy. J Am Chem Soc 2003 Jul 2; 125: 7860-5. 
[145] Prasad P, Shrivastav T. Nanotechnological Contribution to Drug Delivery System: A Reappraisal. J Biomater Nanobiotechnol 2014; 
5: 194-9. 
[146] Liu ZS, Tang SL, Ai ZL. Effects of hydroxyapa tite nanoparticles on proliferation and a poptosis of human hepatoma BEL-7402 cells. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2003 Sep; 9: 1968-71. 
[147] Lu J, Li Z, Zink JI, Tamanoi F. In vivo tumor suppression efficacy of mesoporous silica nanoparticles-based drug-delivery  system: en- 
hanced efficacy by  folate modification. Nanomedicine 2012; 8:212-20. 
[148]     Yamashita K, Yoshioka Y, Higashisaka K, et al. Silica and tita- nium dioxide nanoparticles cause pregnancy complicati ons in 
mice. Nat Nanotechnol 2011; 6: 321-8. 
[149] Cheng Y, Morshed RA, Auffinger B, Tobias AL, Lesniak MS Multifunctional nanoparticles for brain tumor imaging and therapy . 
Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2014; 66: 42-57. 
[150]     Huang XH, Jain PK, El-Sayed IH, El-Sayed MA. Gold nanoparti- cles: interesting optical properties and recent applicat ions in cancer 
  
diagnostic and therapy. Nanomedicine 2007; 2: 681-93. 
[151]     Kumar A, Ma HL, Zhang X, et al. Gold nanoparticles functional- ized with therapeutic and targeted peptides for cancer  
treatment. Biomaterials 2012; 33: 1180-9. 
[152]     Arvizo RR, Saha S, Wang E, Robertson JD, Bhattacharya R, Muk- herjee P. Inhibition of tumor growth and metastasis by a self- 
therapeutic nanoparticle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2013 Apr 23;110: 6700-5. 
[153]     Thakor AS, Jokerst J, Zavaleta C, Massoud TF, Gambhir SS. Gold Nanoparticles: A Revival in Precious Metal Administrat ion to 
Pa- tients. Nano Letters 2011; 11: 4029-36. 
[154]     Arruebo M, Fernandez-Pacheco R, Ibarra MR, Santamaria J. Mag- netic nanoparticles for drug delivery. Nano Today 2007; 2: 22-32. 
[155]     Ding Y, Shen SZ, Sun H, et al. Design and construction of polym- erized-chitosan coated Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles and its 
appli- cation for hydrophobic drug delivery. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl 2015; 48: 487-98.
[156]     Chen FH, Zhang LM, Chen QT, Zhang Y, Zhang ZJ. Synthesis of a novel magnetic drug delivery system composed of doxorub icin- 
conjugated Fe3O4 nanoparticle cores and a PEG-functionalized po- rous silica shell. Chem Commun 2010; 46: 8633-5. 
[157]     Wagstaff AJ, Brown SD, Holden MR, et al. Cisplatin drug delivery using gold-coated iron oxide nanoparticles for enhan ced tumour 
targeting with external magnetic fields. Inorganica Chimica Acta 2012; 393: 328-33. 
[158]    Meidanchi A, Akhavan O, Khoei S, Shokri AA, Hajikarimi Z, Khansari N. ZnFe2O4 nanoparticles as radiosensitizers in rad io- 
therapy of human prostate cancer cells. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl 2015; 46: 394-9. 
[159] Rieter WJ, Pott KM, Taylor KML, Lin WB. Nanoscale coordination polymers for platinum-based anticancer drug delivery. J Am  
Chem Soc 2008; 130: 11584-5. 
[160] Sun XM, Li YD. Colloidal carbon spheres and their core/shell structures with  noble-metal nanoparticles. Angewandte Chemi e- 
International Edition 2004; 43: 597-601. 
[161] Sun  YG,  Mayers  BT,  Xia  YN.  Template-engaged replacement reaction: A one-step approach to the large-scale synthesis of metal 
nanostructures with hollow interiors. Nano Letters 2002; 2: 481-5. 
[162] Chen ML, He YJ, Chen XW, Wang JH. Quantum Dots Conjugated with Fe3O4-Filled Carbon Nanotubes for Cancer-Targeted Imaging 
and  Magnetically  Guided  Drug  Delivery.  Langmuir  2012;  28: 16469-76. 
[163]     Probst CE, Zrazhevskiy P, Bagalkot V, Gao XH. Quantum dots as a platform for nanoparticle drug delivery vehicle desig n. Adv Drug 
Deliver Rev 2013; 65: 703-18. 
[164]     Liu HL, Hua MY, Yang HW, et al. Magnetic resonance monitoring of focused ultrasound/magnetic nanoparticle targeting d elivery of 
therapeutic agents to the brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010; 107: 15205-10. 
[165]     Di W, Ren X, Zhao H, Shirahata N, Sakka Y, Qin W. Single- phased luminescent mesoporous nanoparticles for simultaneous cell 
imaging  and  anticancer  drug  delivery.  Biomaterials  2011;  32: 7226-33. 
[166] Ye F, Barrefelt A, Asem H, et al. Biodegradable polymeric vesicles containing magnetic nanoparticles, quantum dots and  a nticancer 
drugs for drug delivery and imaging. Biomaterials 2014; 35: 3885-94. 
[167]     Della Rocca J, Liu D, Lin W. Nanoscale metal-organic frameworks for biomedical imaging and drug delivery. Acc Chem Re s 
2011;44: 957-68. 
[168] Akhtar MJ, Alhadlaq HA, Kumar S, Alrokayan SA, Ahamed M.Selective cancer-killing ability of metal-based nanoparticles: im pli- 
cations for cancer therapy. Arch Toxicol. 2015 Jul 31. 
[169]    Sakhrani NM, Padh H. Organelle targeting: third level of drug targeting. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2013; 7: 585-99. 
[170] Miller T, Breyer S, van Colen G, Mier W, Haberkorn U, Geissler S,et al. Premature drug release of polymeric micelles and its effects 
on tumor targeting. Int J Pharm 2013; 445: 117-24. 
[171] Meng H, Xue M, Xia T, Ji ZX, Tarn DY, Zink JI, et al. Use of Size and a Copolymer Design Feature To Improve the Biodistri bution 
and the Enhanced Permeability and Retention Effect of D oxorubi- cin-Loaded Mesoporous  Silica  Nanoparticles in  a  Murine 
Xenograft Tumor Model. Acs Nano 2011; 5: 4131-44. 
[172]     Muro  S.  Challenges  in  design  and  characterization of  ligand- targeted drug delivery systems. J Control Release  2012 Dec 10; 
164: 125-37. 
[173] Akhtar MJ, Ahamed M, Alhadlaq HA, Alrokayan SA, Kumar S.Targeted    anticancer    therapy:    overexpressed    receptors    and 
nanotechnology. Clin Chim Acta 2014; 436: 78-92. 
[174]     Arvizo RR, Rana S, Miranda OR, Bhattacharya R, Rotello VM, Mukherjee P. Mechanism of anti-angiogenic property of gold  
nanoparticles: role of nanoparticle size and surface charge. Nanomed-Nanotechnol 2011; 7: 580-7. 
[175] Giri S, Karakoti A, Graham RP, et al. Nanoceria: A Rare-Earth Nanoparticle as a  Novel Anti-Angiogenic Therapeutic Agent in 
Ovarian Cancer. Plos One 2013; 8. 
[176] Gu G, Hu Q, Feng X, Gao X, Menglin J, Kang T, et al. PEG-PLA nanoparticles modified with APTEDB peptide for enhanced anti - 
angiogenic and anti-glioma therapy. Biomaterials 2014; 35: 8215-26. 
[177]     Folkman J. Anti-angiogenesis: new concept for therapy of solid tumors. Ann Surg. 1972; 175: 409-16. 
[178] Heist RS, Duda DG, Sahani DV, et al. Improved tumor vascularization after anti-VEGF therapy with carboplatin and nab-pacl itaxel 
associates with survival in lung cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015; 112: 1547-52. 
[179]     Byrne  JD,  Betancourt  T,  Brannon-Peppas  L.  Active  targeting schemes for nanoparticle systems in cancer therapeu tics. Adv Drug 
Deliver Rev 2008; 60: 1615-26. 
[180] Taheri A, Dinarvand R, Atyabi F, Ghahremani MH, Ostad SN.Trastuzumab decorated methotrexate-human serum albumin 
conjugated nanoparticles for targeted delivery to HER2 positive tumor cells. Eur J Pharm Sci 2012; 47: 331-40. 
[181] Wang LN, Su WJ, Liu Z, et al. CD44 antibody-targeted liposomal nanoparticles for molecular imaging and therapy of hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Biomaterials 2012; 33: 5107-14. 
[182] Abdelghany SM, Schmid D, Deacon J, et al. Enhanced Antitumo r Activity of the Photosensitizer meso-Tetra(N-methyl-4-pyridyl) 
Porphine Tetra Tosylate through Encapsulation in Antibody- Targeted   Chitosan/Alginate  Nanoparticles.  Biomacromolecules 2013; 14: 302-10. 
[183]     Kanapathipillai M, Mammoto A, Mammoto T, et al. Inhibition of Mammary Tumor Growth Using Lysyl Oxidase-Targeting 
Nanoparticles to Modify Extracellular Matrix. Nano Letters 2012;12: 3213-7. 
[184] Davis ME, Zuckerman JE, Choi CHJ, et al. Evidence of RNAi 
in humans from systemically administered siRNA via targeted 
nanoparticles. Nature 2010; 464: 1067-U140. 
[185] Bae S, Ma K, Kim TH, et al. Doxorubicin-loaded human serum albumin nanoparticles surface-modified with TNF-related apopto- 
sis-inducing ligand and transferrin for targeting mu ltiple tumor types. Biomaterials 2012; 33: 1536-46. 
[186]     Hong MH, Zhu SJ, Jiang YY, et al. Novel anti-tumor strategy: PEG-hydroxycamptothecin conjugate loaded transferrin-PEG - 
nanoparticles. J Control Release 2010; 141: 22-9. 
[187]     Zhang H, Hou  L, Jiao X, Ji Y, Zhu  X, Zhang Z. Transferrin- mediated fullerenes nanoparticles as Fe(2+)-dependent dr ug vehi- 
cles  for  synergistic anti-tumor efficacy. Biomaterials 2015;  37: 353-66. 
[188]     Farokhzad OC, Cheng JJ, Teply BA, et al. Targeted nanoparticle- aptamer bioconjugates for cancer chemotherapy in vivo . Proc Natl 
Acad Sci USA 2006; 103: 6315-20. 
[189]     Kaiser PK. Antivascular endothelial growth factor agents and their development: Therapeutic implications in ocular di seases. Am J 
Ophthalmol 2006; 142: 660-8. 
[190]     Farokhzad OC, Jon SY, Khademhosseini A, Tran TNT, LaVan DA, Langer R. Nanopartide-aptamer bioconjugates: A new approach for 
targeting prostate cancer cells. Cancer Research. 2004; 64: 7668-72. 
[191] Cho HJ, Yoon HY, Koo H, Ko SH, Shim JS, Lee JH, et al. Self- assembled nanoparticles based on hyaluronic acid-ceramide (HA- 
CE) and Pluronic (R) for tumor-targeted delivery of docetaxel. Biomaterials 2011; 32: 7181-90. 
 
[192]     Cho HJ, Yoon IS, Yoon HY, et al. Polyethylene glycol-conjugated hyaluronic acid-ceramide self-assembled nanoparticles  for 
targeted delivery of doxorubicin. Biomaterials 2012; 33: 1190-200. 
[193]    Ma M, Chen HR, Chen Y, et al. Hyaluronic acid-conjugated mesoporous silica nanoparticles: excellent colloidal dispersi ty in 
physiological fluids and targeting efficacy. Journal of Materials Chemistry. 2012; 22: 5615-21. 
[194] Forster MD, Ormerod MG, Agarwal R, Kaye SB, Jackman AL. Flow cytometric method for determining folate receptor expression 
on ovarian carcinoma cells. Cytometry A 2007; 71: 945-50. 
[195]     Yu JM, Xie X, Wu JZ, et al. Folic acid conjugated glycol chitosan micelles for targeted delivery of doxorubicin: prep aration and pre- 
liminary evaluation in vitro. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 2013; 24:606-20. 
[196] Majd MH, Asgari D, Barar J, et al. Tamoxifen loaded folic acid armed PEGylated magnetic nanoparticles for targeted imaging and 
therapy of  cancer. Colloids and Surfaces B-Biointerfaces 2013;106: 117-25. 
[197]     Zong H, Thomas TP, Lee KH, et al. Bifunctional PAMAM den- drimer conjugates of folic acid and methotrexate with defin ed ratio. 
Biomacromolecules 2012; 13: 982-91. 
[198]     Wang Y, Li P, Chen L, Gao W, Zeng F, Kong LX. Targeted deliv- ery of 5-fluorouracil to HT-29 cells using high efficie nt folic acid- 
conjugated nanoparticles. Drug Deliv 2015; 22: 191-8. 
[199]     Molek P, Strukelj B, Bratkovic T. Peptide Phage Display as a Tool for Drug Discovery: Targeting Membrane Receptors. M olecules 
2011; 16: 857-87. 
[200]     Pan LM, He QJ, Liu JN, et al. Nuclear-Targeted Drug Delivery of TAT Peptide-Conjugated Monodisperse Mesoporous Silica  
Nanoparticles. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2012; 134: 5722-5. 
[201]     Pearce TR, Shroff K, Kokkoli E. Peptide Targeted Lipid Nanopar- ticles for Anticancer Drug Delivery. Adv Mater 2012; 24: 3803-22. 
[202] Naseri N, Valizadeh H, Zakeri-Milani P. Solid Lipid Nanoparticles and  Nanostructured  Lipid  Carriers:  Structure,  Prep aration  and 
Application. Adv Pharm Bull 2015; 5: 305-13. 
[203] Fadeel B, Garcia-Bennett AE. Better safe than sorry: Understanding the toxicological properties of inorganic nanoparticle s manu- 
factured for biomedical applications. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2010;62: 362-74. 
[204]     Yu M, Zheng J. Clearance Pathways and Tumor Targeting of Imag- ing Nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2015; 9: 6655-74. 
[205] Kotagiri N, Kim JW.  Stealth nanotubes: strategies of  shielding carbon nanotubes to evade opsonization and improve biodi stribu- 
tion. Int J Nanomedicine 2014; 9 Suppl 1: 85-105. 
[206] Zhang XD, Wu D, Shen X, Liu PX, Fan FY, Fan SJ. In vivo renal clearance, biodistribution, toxicity of gold nanoclusters. Biomateri- 
als 2012; 33: 4628-38. 
[207] Alric C,  Miladi I, Kryza D,  et al.  The biodistribution of  gold nanoparticles designed for  renal  clearance. Nanoscal e 2013;  
5:5930-9. 
[208] Chithrani BD, Ghazani AA, Chan WC. Determining the size and shape dependence of  gold nanoparticle uptake into mammalian 
cells. Nano Lett 2006; 6: 662-8. 
[209] Gu L, Fang RH, Sailor MJ, Park JH. In vivo clearance and toxicity of  monodisperse iron  oxide  nanocrystals. ACS  Nano  2012;  
6:4947-54. 
[210] Ahlinder  L,  Ekstrand-Hammarstrom B,  Geladi  P,  Osterlund  L. Large uptake of titania and iron oxide nanoparticles in the nucleus 
of lung epithelial cells as measured by Raman imaging and multi- variate classification. Biophys J 2013; 105: 310-9. 
[211]     Moghimi SM, Hunter AC, Murray JC. Long-circulating and target- specific nanoparticles: Theory to practice. Pharmacol Rev 2001; 
53: 283-318. 
[212]     Anselmo AC, Zhang M, Kumar S, et al. Elasticity of nanoparticles influences their blood circulation, phagocytosis, en docytosis, and 
targeting. ACS Nano 2015; 9: 3169-77. 
[213]     Farace C, Sanchez-Moreno P, Orecchioni M, et al. Immune cell impact of three differently coated lipid nanocapsules: p luronic, chi- 
tosan and polyethylene glycol. Sci Rep 2016; 6: 18423. 
[214]     Farrera C, Fadeel B. It takes two to tango: Understanding the inter- actions between engineered nanomaterials and the  immune system. 
Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2015; 95: 3-12. 
[215]     Hajipour MJ, Laurent S, Aghaie A, Rezaee F, Mahmoudi M. Per- sonalized protein coronas: a "key" factor at the 
nanobiointerface. Biomater Sci-Uk 2014; 2: 1210-21. 
[216] Stoddart A. Corona creation. Nature Materials 2013; 12: 946-. 
[217] Lynch I, Salvati A, Dawson KA. Protein-Nanoparticle Interactions What Does the Cell See? Nature Nanotechnology 2009; 4: 546-7. 
[218]     Thiele L, Diederichs JE, Reszka R, Merkle HP, Walter E. Competi- tive adsorption of serum proteins at microparticles affects phagocy- 
tosis by dendritic cells. Biomaterials 2003; 24: 1409-18. 
[219]     Karmali PP, Simberg D. Interactions of nanoparticles with plasma proteins: implication on clearance and toxicity of d rug delivery sys- 
tems. Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery 2011; 8: 343-57. 
[220]     Sanchez-Moreno P, Buzon P, Boulaiz H, et al. Balancing the effect of corona on therapeutic efficacy and macrophage up take of lipid 
nanocapsules. Biomaterials. 2015 Aug; 61: 266-78. 
[221]   Salvati  A,  Pitek  AS,  Monopoli  MP,  et  al.  Transferrin- functionalized nanoparticles lose their targeting capabil ities when a 
biomolecule corona adsorbs on the surface. Nat Nanotechnol 2013;8: 137-43. 
[222]   Moghimi SM, Hunter AC. Poloxamers and poloxamines in nanoparticle engineering and experimental medicine. Trends Bio- te chnol 
2000; 18: 412-20.[223]     Moghimi SM, Muir IS, Illum L, Davis SS, Kolbbachofen V. Coat- ing Particles with a Block-Copolymer 
(Poloxamine-908) Sup- presses Opsonization but Permits the Activity of Dysopsonins in the Serum. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta 
1993; 1179: 157-65. 
[224]     Hong W, Chen D, Zhang X, et al. Reversing multidrug resistance by intracellular delivery of Pluronic(R) P85 unimers. 
Biomaterials 2013 Dec; 34: 9602-14. 
[225]     Saxena V, Hussain MD. Polymeric Mixed Micelles for Delivery of Curcumin to Multidrug Resistant Ovarian Cancer. Journa l of Bio- 
medical Nanotechnology 2013; 9: 1146-54. 
[226]     Flens MJ, Zaman GJR, vanderValk P, et al. Tissue distribution of the multidrug resistance protein. Am J Pathol 1996; 148: 1237- 
47. 
[227]     Owens DE, Peppas NA. Opsonization, biodistribution, and phar- macokinetics of polymeric nanoparticles. Int J Pharm 20 06; 
307:93-102. 
[228]    Abuchowski A, Vanes T, Palczuk NC, Davis FF. Alteration of Immunological Properties of Bovine Serum-Albumin by Covalen t 
Attachment of Polyethylene-Glycol. J Biol Chem 1977; 252: 3578- 81. 
[229]     Pelaz B, del Pino P, Maffre P, et al. Surface Functionalization of Nanoparticles with Polyethylene Glycol: Effects on  Protein Ad- 
sorption and Cellular Uptake. ACS Nano 2015 Jul 28; 9: 6996-7008. 
[230] Perry JL, Reuter KG, Kai MP, et al. PEGylated PRINT Nanoparti cles: The Impact of PEG Density on Protein Binding, 
MacrophageAssociation,  Biodistribution,  and  Pharmacokinetics.  Nano  Lett 2012; 12: 5304-10. 
[231]     Lee H. Molecular Dynamics Studies of PEGylated Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes: The Effect of PEG Size and Grafting De nsity. J 
Phys Chem C 2013; 117: 26334-41. 
[232]    Rodriguez PL, Harada T, Christian DA, Pantano DA, Tsai RK, Discher DE. Minimal "Self" Peptides That Inhibit Phagocytic  
Clearance and Enhance Delivery of Nanoparticles. Science. 2013; 339: 971-5. 
[233]     Grant DS, Williams TL, Zahaczewsky M, Dicker AP. Comparison of antiangiogenic activities using paclitaxel (taxol) and  
docetaxel (taxotere). Int J Cancer 2003; 104: 121-9. 
[234]     Desai NP, Soon-Shiong P. Nanoparticles of pac litaxel and albumin in combination with bevacizumab against cancer EP 2481405 A1, 
Patent 2012. 
[235]     Mrozek E, Layman R, Ramaswamy B, et al. Phase II trial of neoad- juvant weekly nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel,  carboplatin, 
  
and biweekly bevacizumab therapy in women with clinical stage II or III HER2-negative breast cancer. Clin Breast Cancer 2014; 
14:228-34. 
[236]     Yardley DA, Hart L, Bosserman L, et al. Phase II study evaluating lapatinib in combination with nab-paclitaxel in HER 2- 
overexpressing metastatic breast cancer patients who have received no more than one prior chemotherapeutic regimen. Breast 
Cancer Res Treat 2013; 137: 457-64. 
[237] Pottier A, Borghi E, Levy L. New Use of Metals as Nanosized Radioenhancers. Anticancer Res 2014; 34: 443-53. 
[238]     Gaur S, Wang YF, Kretzner L, et al. Pharmacodynamic and phar- macogenomic study of the nanoparticle conjugate of 
camptothecin CRLX101  for  the  treatment  of  cancer.  Nanomed-Nanotechnol 2014; 10: 1477-86. 
[239] Bergs JWJ, Wacker MG, Hehlgans S, Piiper A, Multhoff G, Rodel C, et al. The role of recent nanotechnology in enhancing the effi- 
cacy of radiation therapy. Bba-Rev Cancer 2015; 1856: 130-43. 
[240] Garraway  LA.  Genomics-Driven Oncology: Framework  for  an Emerging Paradigm. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 1806-14. 
[241]     Simoes MCF, Sousa JJS, Pais AACC. Skin cancer and new treat- ment perspectives: A review. Cancer Lett 2015; 357: 8-42 . 
[242]    Ramirez A, Boulaiz H, Morata-Tarifa C, et al. HER2-signaling pathway, JNK and ERKs kinases, and cancer stem-like cells  are 
targets of Bozepinib small compound. Oncotarget 2014; 5: 3590-606. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
TABLES AND FIGURES 
 
 
Table  1.  Examples of different nanostructured carrier systems  and  the  properties that  influence their suitability 
for parenteral adm inistration. 
 
Nanocarrier Size Range Solubility Stability Clear- 
ance/Filtr ation Toxicity Uptake by Can- 
cer Cells Suitability for Pa r- 
enteral Administra- 
tion Ref. 
Liposomes 50nm- 
above 1¡.m High solubility Poor stability Rapid removal by 
reticuloendothelial 
system Almost bio- 
logically inert. 
Can cause 
“complement 
activation - 
related pseu- 
doallergy”  High uptake *** [81] 
[202] 
Polimeric 
Nanoparticles 1-1000nm High solubility Stable Long time circula- 
tion in blood Reduced tox- 
icity with a 
limited inter- 
action with 
healthy cellsEnhanced uptake *** [81] 
Lipid 
Nanoemul- 
sions less than 
~200-300 
nm High solubility kinetically stable The use of polymer s 
with hydroph ilic 
segment such as 
PEG, poloxamers, or 
chitosan helps to 
extend the life-time
in the blood stream  Low toxicity 
and reduced 
side effects Nanoparticle s 
smaller than 100 
nm preferentially 
accumulate in 
cancer tissues. 
High uptake  *** [81] 
Solid Lipid 
Nanoparticles 40-1000nm Poor stability High physical 
stability Optimum particle 
size for lymphatic 
uptake 10 -100 nm. 
Increase in particle 
size leads to ex- 
tended blood circu- 
lation  Good toler- 
ability and 
biodegra dabil-
ity Relatively low 
tumor uptake * [15] 
Ceramic 
nanoparticles 2-1000nm Generally soluble 
but TiO2 NPs High stability Efficient renal clear-
ance < 10nm. 
Liver, spleen accu- 
mulation and hepatic 
excretion if >10nmGenerally bio-
inert but non 
biodegradable. 
Production of 
ROS for TiO2 .Higher below 
200nm  ** [143] 
[203] [204] 
Carbon nano- 
tubes 1-50 nm 
diameter 
 
100nm- 
5¡.m in 
length Poorly soluble. 
Solubility im- 
proved with 
chemical modi fi- 
cations Native aggregate d 
state. Processing 
strategies to mod- 
ify the surface 
commonly prac- 
ticed  A higher degree of 
surface functional 
groups causes lesser 
accumulation in the 
liver and faster 
clearance through 
the renal system. 
Rapid clearance of 
<500 nm NPs Highly cyto- 
toxic; asbes- 
tos-like toxic- 
ity. 
Biocompati - 
bility in- 
creases if 
functionalized 
with soluble 
and biocom-  
patible materi-
als Acceptable tumor 
uptake * [81] 
[205] 
Gold 
nanoparticles 2-400nm High. Few cases 
of hemolysis and 
blood clotting High  5-30nm clearance by 
kidney.  
>40nm accumula - 
tion in liver and 
spleen  Very low. But 
production of 
ROS  Very high for NPs 
below 100nm *** [206-208] 
Iron oxide 
nanoparticles 5-1000nm Coating makes 
them highly hy- 
droph ilic Excellent chemi- 
cal stability Poor. Accumulation 
in liver and spleen Low High for small 
particles *** [209, 210] 
*** very suitable; ** suitable; * low suitable. 
 
  
 
 
 
Table  2.  Nanomedicines currently available on the market. 
 
 
Product  
Company  
Drug Formulation Indication  
Route of Administration
Abraxane Abrasix Bioscience, As- 
traZeneca  
 
Celgene  Paclitaxel  
 
 
Paclitaxel in combination 
with gemcitabine  Albumin-bound nanopar- 
ticles Metastatic breast cancer  
 
Metastatic pancreatic 
cancer  iva 
DaunoXome Gilead Science Daunorubicin Liposome HIV-related Kaposi sar- 
coma iva 
DepoCyt Skype Pharma  
Enzon Cytarabine Liposome Lymhomatous meningitis intrathecal 
Doxil Sequus Pharmaceutical Doxorubicin Liposome Kaposi sarcoma iva 
Doxy (Caelyx) Orthobiotech 
Scheri ng-P lough 
Janssen  Doxorubicin Pegylated liposome Metastatic breast and 
ovarian cancer; Kaposi 
sarcoma ima 
Genexol-PM Samyang Paclitaxel Polymeric micelle Breast cancer, Small cell 
lung cancer iva 
Marqibo Talon therapeutics Vincristine Liposome Philadelphia chromo- 
some-negative lym- 
phoblastic leukemia iva 
Mepact (mifamurtide) IDM Pharma SAS Synthetic derivative of 
muramyl dipeptide Liposome Osteosarcoma iva 
Myocet  Elan Pharmaceuticals / 
Sopherion Therapeutic s 
Zeneus Pharma Ltd Doxorubicin Liposome Metastatic breast cancer iva 
Oncaspar Enzon Asparaginase PEG nanoparticle Acute Lymphocytic Leu- 
kemia iv/ima 
Zinostatin  Stimalmer Yamanouchi Japan Neocarzinostatin Polymer-drug conjugates Hepatocellular carcinoma Local, via hepatic artery 
infusion 
a iv, intravenous; im, intramuscular. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (1). Time course of publications  related  to nanomedicine.  Data reported  here reflect manuscripts  available  through  PubMed  database 
until September 2015 using the term “nanomedicine”  as a key word. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=nanomedicine).  
 
 
Fig. (2). Five leading cancer types for the estimated deaths, by gender in the United States.  
 
  

  
 
Fig. (3). Examples of drug-delivery  platforms: A) Polymeric nanoparticle. B) Magnetic nanoparticle. C) Liposome. D) Carbon nan otube. E) 
Nanoemulsion. F) Gold nanoparticle. G) Dendrimer. H) Micelle.  
 
 
 
Fig.   (4).  Schematic   representation   of  passive   tissue   targeting, achieved   by  tumor-site   accumulation   of  nanoparticles   that  ex- 
travasate through enlarged pores of tumor vasculature (EPR effect).  
 
Fig. (5). Schematic representation  of active targeting which can be achieved  by functionalizing  the surface of nanocarriers  with moie- ties 
that specifically recognize and bind to tumor cells.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (6). Schematic representation of protein corona developed on the surface of nanoparticles in the presence of serum proteins.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig. (7). Structure of 
Pluronics.  
 

